         PMP
                 (R)




   Project Management
Professional Practice Tests
Save 40% on Study Materials
          When you enter code VBQ66 at checkout on Wiley.com




Save $100 on the Sybex PMP(R) Exam
          Review Course
   Enter code PMPVIP at checkout on




                                                               18-453702




ffirs.indd 10/11/2018 Page ii
         PMP
                       (R)




   Project Management
Professional Practice Tests




         Kim Heldman
        Vanina Mangano
Senior Acquisitions Editor: Kenyon Brown
Development Editor: David Clark
Technical Editor: Ashley Hunt
Senior Production Editor: Christine O'Connor
Copy Editor: Kim Wimpsett
Editorial Manager: Pete Gaughan
Production Manager: Kathleen Wisor
Executive Editor: Jim Minatel
Book Designers: Judy Fung and Bill Gibson
Proofreader: Louise Watson, Word One New York
Indexer: John Sleeva
Project Coordinator, Cover: Brent Savage
Cover Designer: Wiley
Cover Image: Jeremy Woodhouse, Getty Images
Copyright (c) 2018 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc., Indianapolis, Indiana
Published simultaneously in Canada
ISBN: 978-1-119-42115-3
ISBN: 978-1-119-42118-4 (ebk.)
ISBN: 978-1-119-42116-0 (ebk.)
Manufactured in the United States of America
No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system or transmitted in any form or by
any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, scanning or otherwise, except as permitted under
Sections 107 or 108 of the 1976 United States Copyright Act, without either the prior written permission of
the Publisher, or authorization through payment of the appropriate per-copy fee to the Copyright Clearance
Center, 222 Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA 01923, (978) 750-8400, fax (978) 646-8600. Requests to the
Publisher for permission should be addressed to the Permissions Department, John Wiley & Sons, Inc., 111
River Street, Hoboken, NJ 07030, (201) 748-6011, fax (201) 748-6008, or online at http://www.wiley.com/
go/permissions.
Limit of Liability/Disclaimer of Warranty: The publisher and the author make no representations or warranties
with respect to the accuracy or completeness of the contents of this work and specifically disclaim all warranties,
including without limitation warranties of fitness for a particular purpose. No warranty may be created or
extended by sales or promotional materials. The advice and strategies contained herein may not be suitable for
every situation. This work is sold with the understanding that the publisher is not engaged in rendering legal,
accounting, or other professional services. If professional assistance is required, the services of a competent
professional person should be sought. Neither the publisher nor the author shall be liable for damages arising
herefrom. The fact that an organization or Web site is referred to in this work as a citation and/or a potential
source of further information does not mean that the author or the publisher endorses the information the
organization or Web site may provide or recommendations it may make. Further, readers should be aware that
Internet Web sites listed in this work may have changed or disappeared between when this work was written and
when it is read.
For general information on our other products and services or to obtain technical support, please contact
our Customer Care Department within the U.S. at (877) 762-2974, outside the U.S. at (317) 572-3993 or
fax (317) 572-4002.
Wiley publishes in a variety of print and electronic formats and by print-on-demand. Some material included
with standard print versions of this book may not be included in e-books or in print-on-demand. If this
book refers to media such as a CD or DVD that is not included in the version you purchased, you may down-
load this material at http://booksupport.wiley.com. For more information about Wiley products, visit
www.wiley.com.
Library of Congress Control Number: 2018939043
TRADEMARKS: Wiley, the Wiley logo, and the Sybex logo are trademarks or registered trademarks of John
Wiley & Sons, Inc. and/or its affiliates, in the United States and other countries, and may not be used without
written permission. PMP is a registered mark of Project Management Institute, Inc. All other trademarks are
the property of their respective owners. John Wiley & Sons, Inc. is not associated with any product or vendor
mentioned in this book.
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1
To BB, my forever love.
--Kim Heldman


To my incredible family, who make every day worth living.
--Vanina Mangano
Acknowledgments
I am humbled to be part of such a great team who helped in developing this book, and my
other Sybex books, on project management. It takes a strong, dedicated team to produce a
book and I appreciate the help and support of all the Sybex team members who made this
happen.
   The biggest thanks of all goes to Vanina Mangano. Without her valiant efforts, this
book would not have been possible. I am so grateful to her for taking on this book project
and for creating most all of its content. To me, writing good, quality questions is by far
the most difficult task an author can undertake and Vanina did an outstanding job. I am
amazed at her wealth of project management knowledge and am grateful for her willing-
ness to share her insights and experiences. It is always a pleasure to work with Vanina and I
look forward to working with her on many more projects in the coming years.
   Another big thank you goes to Kenyon Brown, senior acquisitions editor, for giving us
the opportunity to write this book. Ken is a delight to work with and I appreciate his help
and insight in making our books the best they can be.
   I would also like to thank all of the instructors who use my books in their PMP(R) prep
classes as well as all of the PMI(R) chapters who use my books. Thank you.
   Last, but always the first on my list, is my best friend for a few decades and counting,
BB. I love you, and I would never have accomplished what I have to date without your
love and support. You're the best! And I'd be remiss if I didn't also thank Jason and Leah,
Noelle, Amanda, and Joe, and of course the two best granddaughters on the planet, Kate
and Juliette, for their support and encouragement.
--Kim Heldman

I'd like to thank the team at Sybex for the opportunity to develop this book. I'm always
amazed at the teamwork and effort that goes into the making and editing of a book, and
each role involved is a critical one.
   I'd like to give a special thanks to Kim Heldman, who I have enjoyed collaborating with
over the years. I'm grateful to have had a glimpse into the warm and personable individual
that she is in reality--just as she comes through in her books! Kim is a role model to all of
us within the project management community, and I'm proud to have coauthored materials
with her.
   Thank you to Kenyon Brown, our senior acquisitions editor, for giving me the opportu-
nity to work on this title and for moving it forward. Ken is a joy to work with, and I appre-
ciate him keeping me in the Sybex family!
   A tremendous thank you to David Clark, development editor. David made the develop-
ment of this book a pleasant and smooth experience. David's endless patience and constant
guidance were immensely appreciated throughout the process.
viii      Acknowledgments



   A special thanks to the individuals who are such a big part of my life and who have
always influenced me in a magnificent way. This includes my family, Nicolas Mangano,
Marysil Mangano, Nicolas Mangano, Jr., and Carina Moncrief; and my beautiful nieces,
Kaylee, Alyssa, Yasmin, and Rianna--you mean everything to me! Thank you to Roshoud
Brown, a brilliant and talented author; Roshoud has served as a constant source of inspira-
tion over the past 20 years.
--Vanina Mangano

We would like to thank Kim Wimpsett, copy editor, who made sure the grammar and spell-
ing were picture perfect; Louise Watson, proofreader, for catching those last little "oops;"
and Christine O'Connor, production editor, who made sure everything flowed through the
production process. Thanks also to our compositor, Aptara Inc., New Delhi, India and the
indexer, Ted Laux. The book couldn't have happened without them.
--The Authors
About the Authors
Kim Heldman, MBA, PMP(R) Kim Heldman is the senior manager/CIO of information
technology for the Regional Transportation District in Denver, Colorado. Kim directs IT
resource planning, budgeting, project prioritization, and strategic and tactical planning. She
directs and oversees IT design and development, the IT program management office,
enterprise resource planning systems, IT infrastructure, application development,
cybersecurity, intelligent transportation systems, and data center operations.
   Kim oversees the IT portfolio of projects ranging from projects small in scope and bud-
get to multimillion-dollar, multiyear projects. She has more than 25 years of experience in
information technology project management. Kim has served in a senior leadership role for
more than 18 years and is regarded as a strategic visionary with an innate ability to col-
laborate with diverse groups and organizations, instill hope, improve morale, and lead her
teams in achieving goals they never thought possible.
   Kim is the author of the PMP(R): Project Management Professional Study Guide,
Ninth Edition. She is also the author of Project Management JumpStart, Fourth Edition;
CompTIA Project+, Second Edition; and Project Manager's Spotlight on Risk Management.
Kim has also published several articles and is currently working on a leadership book.
   Kim continues to write about project management best practices and leadership
topics, and she speaks frequently at conferences and events. You can contact Kim at
Kim.Heldman@gmail.com. She personally answers all her email.

Vanina Mangano Over the past decade, Vanina has specialized in working with and lead-
ing project, program, and portfolio management offices (PMOs) across various industries
and companies, most recently at NBCUniversal and AMN Healthcare. Currently, Vanina
leads a project portfolio management office (PMO) at Microsoft Corporation.
   As part of her contribution to the community, Vanina devotes time to furthering the
project management profession through her volunteer work at the Project Management
Institute. Vanina is currently a member of PMI's Standards Member Advisory Group,
where she serves in an advisory role for all matters related to the governance and manage-
ment of the PMI Standards Program. She has also served as chair for The Standard for
Program Management, Fourth Edition, and played a role in several other PMI standards
and practice guides, including A Guide to the Project Management Body of Knowledge
(PMBOK(R) Guide), Sixth Edition.
   Vanina holds a dual bachelor's degree from the University of California, Riverside,
and holds the following credentials: Project Management Professional (PMP)(R), PMI(R)
Risk Management Professional (PMI-RMP)(R), PMI(R) Scheduling Professional (PMI-SP)(R),
CompTIA Project+, and ITIL Foundation v3.
   You can reach Vanina through LinkedIn: https://www.linkedin.com/in/vaninam/.
Contents at a Glance
Introduction                                              xv

Chapter 1      Initiating (Domain 1.0)                     1
Chapter 2      Planning (Domain 2.0)                      39
Chapter 3      Executing (Domain 3.0)                     79
Chapter 4      Monitoring and Controlling (Domain 4.0)   117
Chapter 5      Closing (Domain 5.0)                      153
Chapter 6      Full-Length Practice Exam                 189

Appendix       Answers Appendix                          233

Index                                                    325
Contents
Introduction                                                             xv

Chapter        1   Initiating (Domain 1.0)                                1

Chapter        2   Planning (Domain 2.0)                                39

Chapter        3   Executing (Domain 3.0)                                79

Chapter        4   Monitoring and Controlling (Domain 4.0)              117

Chapter        5   Closing (Domain 5.0)                                 153

Chapter        6   Full-Length Practice Exam                            189

Appendix           Answers Appendix                                     233
                   Chapter 1: Initiating (Domain 1.0)                   234
                   Chapter 2: Planning (Domain 2.0)                     247
                   Chapter 3: Executing (Domain 3.0)                    263
                   Chapter 4: Monitoring and Controlling (Domain 4.0)   276
                   Chapter 5: Closing (Domain 5.0)                      289
                   Chapter 6: Full-Length Practice Exam                 304
  Index                                                                 325
Introduction
Congratulations on your decision to pursue the Project Management Professional (PMP)(R)
credential, one of the most globally recognized credentials within the project management
industry. The PMP(R) credential is offered by the Project Management Institute (PMI(R)), a
not-for-profit organization with thousands of members across the globe. PMI(R) has been a
long-standing advocate and contributor to the project management industry and offers sev-
eral credentials for those specializing in the field of project management.
    This book is meant for anyone preparing for the PMP(R) certification exam. Whether you
are in the final stages of preparation, interested in familiarizing yourself with the ques-
tion formats, or simply looking for additional practice in answering exam questions, this
book has you covered. Those studying for the Certified Associate in Project Management
(CAPM)(R) exam will also benefit, since both the PMP(R) and CAPM(R) certification exams are
largely based on content from A Guide to the Project Management Body of Knowledge
(PMBOK(R) Guide), Sixth Edition, and follow a similar structure.
    When it comes to preparing for an exam, knowing the core concepts is essential, but
strengthening your test-taking skills is also important. One common test-taking method
is based on an old saying: "Practice makes perfect." The structure of this book coincides
with the PMP(R) : Project Management Professional Exam Review Guide, Fourth Edition,
also published by Sybex, which is intended to be an easy reference guide for the contents
covered within the PMBOK(R) Guide, Sixth Edition, in addition to other material you need
to know. The Review Guide provides a summary of concepts included on the exam, orga-
nized by exam domain. This book tests your knowledge of the tasks covered by the exam
domains with the goal of exposing you to questions formatted similarly to those you would
find on the actual exam. The more questions that you expose yourself to, the more you will
be prepared on exam day.



Book Structure
This book has been structured to coincide with the exam domains presented in the PMP(R)
Examination Content Outline, published by PMI. Each exam domain covers tasks associ-
ated with the project management process groups.
    Initiating
    Planning
    Executing
    Monitoring and Controlling
    Closing
   An explanation is provided after each practice test to help you learn the concepts. The
final chapter of this book includes a full-length exam.
xvi         Introduction




                   It's a good idea to complete the full-length exam included within the final
                   chapter of this book in a timed sitting. This will partially simulate the expe-
                   rience of exam day, when you will need to answer a set of 200 questions
                   within a four-hour period.


Overview of PMI(R) Credentials
PMI(R) offers several credentials within the field of project management, so whether you are
an experienced professional or looking to enter the project management field for the fi rst
time, you'll fi nd something to meet your needs. You may hold one or multiple credentials
concurrently.
   Over the years, PMI(R) has contributed to the project management body of knowledge by
developing global standards used by thousands of project management professionals and
organizations. In total, there are four foundational standards, seven practice standards, and
four practice guides, all grouped within the following categories:
      Projects
      Programs
      Profession
      Organizations
      People
   Several credentials offered by PMI(R)are based on the PMBOK(R) Guide, which is part of
the Projects category. As of the publication date of this book, PMI(R) offers eight credentials.
Let's briefly go through them.

Project Management Professional (PMP)(R)
You are most likely familiar with the PMP(R) credential--after all, you purchased this book!
But did you know that the PMP(R) certification is the most widely and globally recognized
project management certification? The PMP(R), along with several other credentials, vali-
dates your experience and knowledge of project management. This makes obtaining a
PMP(R) in itself a great achievement. The following requirements are necessary to apply for
the PMP(R) exam:
Work Experience The following work experience must have been accrued over the past
eight consecutive years:
      If you have a bachelor's degree or the global equivalent: three years (36 months) of non-
      overlapping project management experience, totaling at least 4,500 hours
      If you have a high-school diploma, associate's degree, or global equivalent: five
      years (60 months) of non-overlapping project management experience, totaling at
      least 7,500 hours
                                                                    Introduction          xvii




Contact Hours "Contact hours" refers to the number of qualified formal educational
hours obtained that relate to project management. A total of 35 contact hours is required
and must be completed before you submit your application.

Certified Associate in Project Management (CAPM)(R)
The CAPM(R) credential is ideal for someone looking to enter the project management indus-
try. You may meet the requirements through work experience or through formal project
management education. If you do not currently have project management experience, you
may apply if you have accumulated the requisite number of formal contact hours.
Work Experience 1,500 hours of formal project management experience
Contact Hours    23 contact hours of formal project management education

Program Management Professional (PgMP)(R)
The PgMP(R) credential is ideal for those who specialize in the area of program manage-
ment or would like to highlight their experience of program management. A PMP(R) is not
required to obtain this or any other credential. You must meet the following requirements
to apply for the PgMP(R) exam:
Work Experience The following work experience must have been accrued over the past 15
consecutive years:
    If you have a bachelor's degree or global equivalent: four years of non-overlapping
    project management experience, totaling at least 6,000 hours, and four years of
    non-overlapping program management experience, totaling 6,000 hours
    If you have a high-school diploma, associate's degree, or global equivalent: four years
    of non-overlapping project management experience, totaling at least 6,000 hours, and
    seven years of non-overlapping program management experience, totaling 10,500 hours

Portfolio Management Professional (PfMP)(R)
The PfMP(R) is meant for those specializing in the area of portfolio management. It reflects
several years of hands-on portfolio management experience, geared toward achieving stra-
tegic objectives. You must meet the following requirements to apply for the PfMP(R) exam:
Work Experience The following work experience must have been accrued over the past 15
consecutive years:
    If you have a bachelor's degree or global equivalent: 6,000 hours of portfolio manage-
    ment experience, plus eight years (96 months) of professional business experience
    If you have a high-school diploma, associate's degree, or global equivalent: 10,500
    hours of portfolio management experience, plus eight years (96 months) of professional
    business experience
xviii          Introduction



PMI Risk Management Professional (PMI-RMP)(R)
The PMI-RMP(R) credential is ideal for those who specialize in the area of risk management
or would like to highlight their risk management experience. The following are the require-
ments to apply for the PMI-RMP(R) exam:
Work Experience The following work experience must have been accrued over the past
five consecutive years:
        If you have a bachelor's degree or global equivalent: 3,000 hours of professional proj-
        ect risk management experience
        If you have a high-school diploma, associate's degree, or global equivalent: 4,500 hours
        of professional project risk management experience

Contact Hours
        If you have a bachelor's degree or global equivalent: 30 contact hours in the area of
        risk management
        If you have a high-school diploma, associate's degree, or global equivalent: 40 contact
        hours in the area of risk management

PMI Scheduling Professional (PMI-SP)(R)
The PMI-SP(R) credential is ideal for those who specialize in the area of project scheduling or
who would like to highlight their project scheduling experience. You must meet the follow-
ing requirements to apply for the PMI-SP(R) exam:
Work Experience The following work experience must have been accrued over the past
five consecutive years:
        If you have a bachelor's degree or global equivalent: 3,500 hours of professional project
        scheduling experience
        If you have a high-school diploma, associate's degree, or global equivalent: 5,000 hours
        of professional project scheduling experience

Contact Hours
        If you have a bachelor's degree or global equivalent: 30 contact hours in the area of
        project scheduling
        If you have a high-school diploma, associate's degree, or global equivalent: 40 contact
        hours in the area of project scheduling

PMI Agile Certified Professional (PMI-ACP)(R)
The PMI-ACP(R) credential is ideal for those who work with Agile teams or practices. The
PMI-ACP(R) covers approaches such as Scrum, Kanban, Lean, Extreme Programming (XP),
and Test-Driven Development (TDD). You must meet the following requirements to apply
for the PMI-ACP(R) exam:
                                                                     Introduction         xix




Work Experience The following work experience must have been accrued:
    2,000 hours (12 months) working on projects teams--accrued in the last 5 years
    1,500 hours (8 months) working on project teams using Agile methodologies--achieved
    in the last 3 years

Contact Hours
    21 hours of formal Agile training

PMI Professional in Business Analysis (PMI-PBA)(R)
The PMI-PBA(R) credential is meant for those specializing in business analysis. This creden-
tial is ideal for those managing requirements or product development. You must meet the
following requirements to apply for the PMI-PBA(R) exam:
Work Experience The following work experience must have been accrued over the past
eight consecutive years:
    If you have a bachelor's degree or global equivalent: 4,500 hours of professional busi-
    ness analysis experience, and 2,000 hours of general project experience
    If you have a high-school diploma, associate's degree, or global equivalent: 7,500 hours
    of business analysis experience, and 2,000 hours of general project experience

Contact Hours
    35 hours of formal training in the area of business analysis practices


                 For the latest information regarding the PMI(R) credentials and other exam
                 information, you can visit PMI(R) 's website at www.PMI.org.




Day of the Exam
After gaining the necessary prerequisites to sit for the exam, the PMP (R) exam itself serves
as the fi nal measure to earning your certification. You are already well ahead of the game
in preparing for the exam when you purchase this book. The preparation you put forth
will help you show up on the day of the exam in a calm and confident state. Throughout
the course of this book, you will fi nd sections that offer tips of what to do on the day
of the exam. While you are not allowed to take anything into the exam, you are given
scratch paper to work with during your exam. Using the tips in this book, before you
begin the exam, you can jot down notes that will free your mind to focus fully on the
questions. In the days leading up to the exam, we recommend that you practice creating
your reference sheet by memorizing the mnemonics, formulas, and other information that
you will need.
xx        Introduction



   Clearly, standard test-taking advice is relevant here, such as getting a good night's sleep,
eating a good breakfast, and going through relaxation exercises before you are called into
the exam room. In addition, during the exam:
     Take the time to read through each question slowly and completely. Fully understand-
     ing what is being asked in the question can contribute greatly to getting the right
     answer.
     You will be given the ability to mark a question if you are unsure of your answer or are
     unable to come up with the answer. Take advantage of this feature, so you can move
     on to the next question. At the end of the exam, you can come back and review your
     answers and take more time to answer questions that escaped your answer earlier in
     the process.
   You have four hours to complete an examination of 200 questions. Tell yourself that it
is more important to pass than it is to go home early. If it will help, write that statement at
the top of your reference scratch paper so you can remind yourself of this ideal. In a four-hour
examination, it is possible to get fatigued and just want to be done with it. Make sure you
keep your focus and energy on success.


                  It's a good idea to use scratch paper given to you for use during your exam
                  to jot down formulas and other information memorized that you may for-
                  get if you become mentally exhausted midway through the exam. Keep in
                  mind that you cannot use your scratch paper until the exam time officially
                  starts.

  For more information from PMI(R) on preparing for the exam, be sure to review
www.pmi.org and search for PMP Exam Guidance for more valuable resources.
                                                                     Introduction           xxi




Project Management Professional
(PMP)(R): Exam Domains and Tasks
The PMP(R) exam is based on five exam domains: Initiating, Planning, Executing,
Monitoring and Controlling, and Closing. Each exam domain encompasses a series
of tasks, as published by PMI within the Project Management Professional (PMP)(R)
Examination Content Outline. The table below maps these exam domain tasks to the
corresponding chapter that contains sample practice test questions relating to the tasks.
In addition to the reference table below, you will find exam domain tasks listed at the
beginning of each corresponding chapter.


Exam Domain                                                                         Chapter


Initiating (Domain 1.0)

Perform project assessment based upon available information, lessons learned          1
from previous projects, and meetings with relevant stakeholders in order to
support the evaluation of the feasibility of new products or services within the
given assumptions and/or constraints.

Identify key deliverables based on the business requirements in order to manage       1
customer expectations and direct the achievement of project goals.

Participate in the development of the project charter by compiling and analyzing      1
gathered information in order to ensure project stakeholders are in agreement
on its elements.

Identify high-level risks, assumptions, and constraints based on the current          1
environment, organizational factors, historical data, and/or expert judgment, in
order to propose an implementation strategy.

Obtain project charter approval from the sponsor in order to formalize the            1
authority assigned to the project manager and gain commitment and acceptance
for the project.

Perform stakeholder analysis using appropriate tools and techniques in order to       1
align expectations and gain support for the project.

Conduct benefit analysis with relevant stakeholders to validate project alignment     1
with organizational strategy and expected business value.

Inform stakeholders of the approved project charter to ensure common                  1
understanding of the key deliverables, milestones, and their roles and
responsibilities.
xxii        Introduction




Exam Domain                                                                          Chapter


Planning (Domain 2.0)

Review and assess detailed project requirements, constraints, and assumptions          2
with stakeholders based on the project charter, lessons learned, and by using
gathering techniques in order to establish detailed project deliverables.

Develop a scope management plan based on the approved project scope and                2
using scope management techniques, in order to define, maintain, and manage
the scope of the project.

Develop the project schedule based on the approved project deliverables and            2
milestones, scope, and resource management plans in order to manage timely
completion of the project.

Develop the cost management plan based upon the project scope, schedule,               2
resources, approved project charter and other information, using estimating
techniques, in order to manage project costs.

Develop the quality management plan and define the quality standards for the           2
project and its products, based on the project scope, risks, and requirements in
order to prevent the occurrence of defects and reduce the cost of quality.

Develop the human resource management plan by defining the roles and                   2
responsibilities of the project team members in order to create a project
organizational structure and provide guidance regarding how resources will be
assigned and managed.

Develop the communications management plan based on the project                        2
organizational structure and stakeholder requirements in order to define and
manage the flow of project information.

Develop the procurement management plan based on the project scope, budget,            2
and schedule in order to ensure that the required project resources will be
available.

Develop the change management plan by defining how changes will be                     2
addressed and controlled in order to track and manage change.

Plan for risk management plan by developing a risk management plan;                    2
identifying, analyzing, and prioritizing project risk; creating the risk register;
and defining risk response strategies in order to manage uncertainty and
opportunity throughout the project life cycle.

Present the project management plan to the relevant stakeholders according to          2
applicable policies and procedures in order to obtain approval to proceed with
project execution.
                                                                   Introduction          xxiii




Exam Domain                                                                        Chapter

Conduct kick-off meeting, communicating the start of the project, key                2
milestones, and other relevant information in order to inform and engage
stakeholders and gain commitment.

Develop the stakeholder engagement plan by analyzing needs, interests, and           2
potential impact in order to effectively manage stakeholders' expectations and
engage them in project decisions.


Executing (Domain 3.0)

Acquire and manage project resources by following the human resource and             3
procurement management plans in order to meet project requirements.

Manage task execution based on the project management plan by leading and            3
developing the project team in order to achieve project deliverables.

Implement the quality management plan using the appropriate tools and                3
techniques in order to ensure that work is being performed in accordance with
required quality standards.

Implement approved changes and corrective actions by following the change            3
management plan in order to meet project requirements.

Implement approved actions by following the risk management plan in order            3
to minimize the impact of the risks and take advantage of opportunities on the
project.

Manage the flow of information by following the communications plan in order         3
to keep stakeholders engaged and informed.

Maintain stakeholder relationships by following the stakeholder management           3
plan in order to receive continued support and manage expectations.


Monitoring and Controlling (Domain 4.0)

Measure project performance using appropriate tools and techniques in order to       4
identify and quantify any variances and corrective actions.

Manage changes to the project by following the changed management plan in            4
order to ensure that project goals remain aligned with business needs.

Verify that project deliverables conform to the quality standards established in     4
the quality management plan by using appropriate tools and techniques to meet
project requirements and business needs.
xxiv        Introduction




Exam Domain                                                                         Chapter

Monitor and assess risk by determining whether exposure has changed and               4
evaluating the effectiveness of response strategies in order to manage the
impact of risks and opportunities on the project.

Review the issue log, update if necessary, and determine corrective actions by        4
using appropriate tools and techniques in order to minimize the impact on the
project.

Capture, analyze, and manage lessons learned, using lessons learned                   4
management techniques in order to enable continuous improvement.

Monitor procurement activities according to the procurement plan in order to          4
verify compliance with project objectives.


Closing (Domain 5.0)

Obtain final acceptance of the project deliverables from relevant stakeholders in     5
order to confirm that project scope and deliverables were achieved.

Transfer the ownership of deliverables to the assigned stakeholders in                5
accordance with the project plan in order to facilitate project closure.

Obtain financial, legal, and administrative closure using generally accepted          5
practices and policies in order to communicate formal project closure and
ensure transfer of liability.

Prepare and share the final project report according to the communications            5
management plan in order to document and convey project performance and
assist in project evaluation.

Collate lessons learned that were documented throughout the project and               5
conduct a comprehensive project review in order to update the organization's
knowledge base.

Archive project documents and materials using generally accepted practices            5
in order to comply with statutory requirements and for potential use in future
projects and audits.

Obtain feedback from relevant stakeholders using appropriate tools and                5
techniques and based on the stakeholder management plan in order to evaluate
their satisfaction.
Chapter   Initiating (Domain 1.0)

 1        The Project Management
          Professional (PMP)(R) exam content
          from the Initiating the Project
          performance domain covered
          in this chapter includes the
          following:

           Perform project assessment based upon available
           information, lessons learned from previous projects, and
           meetings with relevant stakeholders in order to support
           the evaluation of the feasibility of new products or
           services within the given assumptions and/or constraints.

           Identify key deliverables based on the business
           requirements in order to manage customer expectations
           and direct the achievement of project goals.

           Participate in the development of the project charter by
           compiling and analyzing gathered information in order
           to ensure project stakeholders are in agreement on its
           elements.

           Identify high-level risks, assumptions, and constraints
           based on the current environment, organizational factors,
           historical data, and expert judgment, in order to propose
           an implementation strategy.

           Obtain project charter approval from the sponsor, in
           order to formalize the authority assigned to the project
           manager and gain commitment and acceptance for the
           project.

           Perform stakeholder analysis using appropriate tools
           and techniques in order to align expectations and gain
           support for the project.
 Conduct benefit analysis with relevant stakeholders to
 validate project alignment with organizational strategy
 and expected business value.

 Inform stakeholders of the approved project charter to
 ensure common understanding of the key deliverables,
 milestones, and their roles and responsibilities.


               The process names, inputs, tools and techniques,
               outputs, and descriptions of the project man-
               agement process groups and related materials
               and figures in this chapter are based on content
               from A Guide to the Project Management Body
               of Knowledge (PMBOK (R) Guide), Sixth Edition
               (PMI(R), 2017).
                                                  Chapter 1       Initiating (Domain 1.0)            3



1. A project manager has just been assigned to a newly approved project and has been tasked with
   developing the first draft of the project charter. To better understand the financials, the project
   manager decides to review the net present value and payback period calculated for the
   project. Which of the following inputs can the project manager reference for this information?
   A. Project budget
   B.   Business case
   C.   Benefits management plan
   D.   Project charter

2. Quincy and Michael are two executives of Widgets for Life, a company providing the
   latest cool lifestyle gadgets. As part of their annual planning process, they sit down to
   evaluate three projects linked to their department objectives. They decide to use benefit
   measurement methods to help them choose which project to select. Which of the following
   analysis tools are they likely to use?
   A. Linear
   B.   Benefit-cost ratio
   C.   Multi-objective programming
   D.   Nonlinear

3. Carina is a principal project manager of You've Got Dogs, a specialty company that
   creates custom dog apparel and toys. Three months into the project, she kicks off the
   second phase of a project that is developing high-tech dog bones. As part of her practice,
   she sits down with her sponsor to determine whether there are any new players that they
   missed in the first phase, and they hold a discussion on the direction of influence of these
   new stakeholders. What process is Carina carrying out?
   A. Plan Stakeholder Engagement
   B.   Identify Stakeholders
   C.   Plan Resource Management
   D.   Identify Risks

4. Quincy and Michael are two executives of Widgets for Life, a company providing the
   latest cool lifestyle gadgets. They have recently selected the next big project and have
   assigned you as the project manager. This activity is associated with what process group?
   A. Initiating
   B.   Planning
   C.   Executing
   D.   Monitoring and Controlling

5. The project processes are iterative, are results oriented, and interact with each other.
   Shewhart and Deming developed a concept that reflects this idea. Which of the following
   is the name of this cycle?
   A. Plan-Do-Check-Act
   B.   Initiate-Requirements-Execute-Close
   C.   Select-Plan-Monitor-Act
   D.   Strategize-Justify-Choose-Execute-Control
4            Chapter 1      Initiating (Domain 1.0)



     6. All of the following are types of project management offices (PMOs) except for which one?
        A. Directive
        B.   Center of Excellence
        C.   Supportive
        D.   Controlling

     7. Kaylee has been managing projects for more than a decade and has largely used the
        Waterfall method. She has recently taken a new job for a company that builds software
        for mobile devices and has begun studying the Agile method, which is largely used by this
        company. She begins by studying the Agile principles. What is the formalized document
        called that identifies 12 principles of the Agile approach?
        A. Agile Principles
        B.   Agile Charter
        C.   Agile Manifesto
        D.   Book of Agile

     8. All of the following are tools and techniques of the Identify Stakeholders process except
        for which one?
        A. Meetings
        B.   Data representation
        C.   Expert judgment
        D.   Agreements

     9. All of the following are true regarding project life cycles except for which one?
        A. In the beginning of the project life cycle, costs are low, and few team members are
           assigned to the project.
        B.   Toward the end of the project, stakeholders have the greatest chance of influencing a
             project.
        C.   Risk is highest at the beginning of the project and gradually decreases over the
             project's life cycle.
        D.   The potential of a project ending successfully is lowest at the beginning and increases
             as the project progresses through its life cycle.

    10. You are a project manager and work in an organization that is considered to be a
        weak-matrix organizational type. What is a disadvantage of working in this type of
        organization?
        A. You have little authority.
        B.   You have limited funds.
        C.   You can only use the Waterfall methodology.
        D.   You have job and role stability.
                                                 Chapter 1      Initiating (Domain 1.0)           5



11. According to the Project Management Institute (PMI), a good project manager spends how
    much time communicating?
    A. 50 percent
    B.   75 percent
    C.   90 percent
    D.   100 percent

12. You are the project manager for a project that will produce a mobile phone application
    that sends alerts when the UV rays are at dangerous levels, alerting users to stay indoors.
    You are in the process of acquiring resources to staff the project and obtaining responses
    from bidders on work that is being outsourced. These activities are associated with what
    process group?
    A. Planning
    B.   Executing
    C.   Monitoring and Controlling
    D.   Closing

13. Carina is a principal project manager of You've Got Dogs, a specialty company that
    creates custom dog apparel and toys. She has just obtained approval of the project
    management plan and is about to publish it to the project team. What process group are
    the activities she is performing associated with?
    A. Initiating
    B.   Planning
    C.   Executing
    D.   Monitoring and Controlling

14. Phase endings are characterized by which of the following?
    A. Deliverables quality analysis and written sign-off
    B.   Completion, review, and approval of deliverables
    C.   Deliverables review and written sign-off
    D.   Completion, quality analysis, and approval of deliverables

15. Your project has kicked off, and you are beginning a series of overview sessions with key
    users to determine requirements for a new enterprise resource software implementation.
    One of your stakeholders is exceptionally contentious and throws obstacles up at every
    turn. One of the problems she has described does seem to be legitimate. There is an issue
    with the data from the legacy system that needs to be resolved before moving forward.
    Which of the following statements is not true regarding this situation?
    A. You should approach this by defining the problem and focus on separating causes and
       symptoms.
    B.   You should use a two-step process involving problem definition and decision-making.
    C.   Your decision-making has a timing element.
    D.   Your decision-making involves asking questions to determine whether the issues are
         internal or external to the project.
6            Chapter 1       Initiating (Domain 1.0)



    16. Which of the following is true?
        A. There are five project management process groups, and they are Initiating, Planning,
           Executing, Monitoring and Controlling, and Closing.
        B.   There are 55 project management processes, which can be grouped by process group
             or Knowledge Area.
        C.   There are 10 project management Knowledge Areas, whose processes are performed
             sequentially.
        D.   There are five project management process groups, and they are Initiating, Planning,
             Managing, Monitoring, and Closing.

    17. Your project has kicked off, and you are beginning a series of overview sessions with key
        users to determine requirements for a new enterprise resource software implementation.
        One of your stakeholders is exceptionally contentious and throws obstacles up at every
        turn. One of the problems she has described does seem to be legitimate. There is an issue
        with the data from the legacy system that needs to be resolved before moving forward. The
        PMO you report to practices phase sequencing and requires closure of each phase before
        the next phase can begin. What is this process called?
        A. Gate exit
        B.   Phase review
        C.   Phase exit
        D.   Stage review

    18. Sue is the head of an enterprise project management office (PMO). She delivers a
        presentation at the annual company meeting to describe her roles and responsibilities and
        the value of the PMO. As part of her presentation, she notes that the PMO is responsible
        for ensuring that projects, programs, and portfolios are aligned and managed according to
        the organization's strategic business objectives. What is this referred to as?
        A. Business management
        B.   PMI Talent TriangleTM
        C.   Organizational project management
        D.   Project portfolio management

    19. Direct and Manage Project Work, Manage Quality, and Conduct Procurements are
        processes belonging to what project management process group?
        A. Planning
        B.   Executing
        C.   Monitoring and Controlling
        D.   Closing
                                                  Chapter 1      Initiating (Domain 1.0)             7



20. Which of the following statements best describes stakeholders?
    A. An individual, group, or organization that may affect, be affected by, or perceive itself
       to be affected by a decision, activity, or outcome of a project.
    B.   Individuals assigned to carry out the work of the project, as defined by the project
         management plan.
    C.   The person assigned by the performing organization to lead the team that is
         responsible for achieving the project objectives.
    D.   An individual or a group that provides resources and support for the project and is
         accountable for enabling success.

21. Sally and Joe are two project managers working in the corporate offices of a popular
    fast food franchise. They are both studying for their PMP(R) certification, and they have a
    spirited debate over who is responsible for managing and performing project Integration.
    Sally claims it is the project sponsor, while Joe adamantly insists it is the project manager.
    Who is correct?
    A. Both
    B.   Sally
    C.   Joe
    D.   Neither

22. You are the newly appointed project manager of a high-profile, critical project for your
    organization. The project team is structured outside your normal organizational structure,
    and you have full authority for this project. What type of organization does this describe?
    A. Hybrid
    B.   Strong matrix
    C.   Functional
    D.   Balanced matrix

23. Yasmin is a senior project manager who has just taken on a project that will produce a
    new line of medical widgets for a Fortune 100 company. The entire industry is buzzing
    with excitement over this project, which is estimated to span three years and require an
    investment of $1.5 billion from the company. What type of project is this?
    A. Megaproject
    B.   Strategic project
    C.   Program
    D.   Portfolio

24. You work in an organization that is considered to be a project-oriented organizational
    type. What is an advantage of working in this type of organization?
    A. You have high to almost total access to resources.
    B.   You have unlimited access to funds.
    C.   You are a part-time PM and can straddle two roles.
    D.   You have job and role stability.
8            Chapter 1      Initiating (Domain 1.0)



    25. Carina is a principal project manager of You've Got Dogs, a specialty company that
        creates custom dog apparel and toys. She has just finished developing the project charter of
        a project that will create a new line of high-tech dog bones. What is the significance of the
        project charter?
        A. Once approved, the project team can begin working on the project.
        B.   Once approved, the project manager can begin carrying out planning activities.
        C.   Once approved, the project sponsor can begin allocating funds to the project.
        D.   Once approved, it gives the project manager authority to apply resources to the
             project.

    26. A project manager considers how best to navigate through the politics of the organization
        where most of their project team reside. What skill set is the project manager exercising?
        A. Technical project management
        B.   Leadership
        C.   Strategic and business management
        D.   Stakeholder management

    27. You are a project manager working on contract. The organization that's contracted with
        your company is not happy with the progress of the project to date. They claim that an
        important deliverable was overlooked and that you should halt the project and reassess
        how to meet this deliverable. You know that the customer has approved all phases of the
        project to date. Which of the following statements is true?
        A. You and your company might have to use problem-solving techniques such as
           arbitration and mediation to reach an agreement.
        B.   You and your company might have to use communication techniques such as
             arbitration and mediation to reach an agreement.
        C.   You and your company might have to use negotiation techniques such as arbitration
             and mediation to reach an agreement.
        D.   You and your company might have to use influencing techniques such as arbitration
             and mediation to reach an agreement.

    28. Carina is a principal project manager of You've Got Dogs, a specialty company that
        creates custom dog apparel and toys. She has just obtained approval of the project
        management plan and is about to publish it to the project team. At this point in the project
        life cycle, costs are likely to be which of the following?
        A. Lowest
        B.   Low
        C.   High
        D.   Highest

    29. What brings together a set of tools and techniques to describe, organize, and monitor the
        work of project activities?
        A. Projects
        B.   Project management
                                                  Chapter 1      Initiating (Domain 1.0)           9



    C.   Portfolio management
    D.   Programs

30. Which of the following best describes the purpose of the Monitoring and Controlling
    process group?
    A. Formulating and revising project goals and objectives, and creating the project
       management plan
    B.   Putting the project management plan into action
    C.   Measuring and analyzing project performance to determine whether the project is
         progressing according to the plan
    D.   Bringing the project or phase to a formal, orderly end

31. A project manager has facilitated the decomposition of work packages into activities.
    She next carries the team through several exercises to identify predecessor and successor
    activities. The project manager is performing activities associated with which Knowledge Area?
    A. Project Scope Management
    B.   Project Schedule Management
    C.   Project Time Management
    D.   Project Integration Management

32. All of the following are true regarding the Initiating process group except for which one?
    A. The Initiating process group is responsible for developing the document that
       authorizes the project.
    B.   The Initiating process group processes are iterative in nature, and often are revisited
         at the beginning of every phase.
    C.   The Initiating process group is responsible for defining a new project or phase by
         obtaining authorization to start the project or phase.
    D.   The Initiating process group encompasses the fewest number of project management
         processes.

33. Functional (centralized), matrix, and project-oriented are all types of which of the
    following?
    A. Communication styles
    B.   Organizational cultures
    C.   Organizational structures
    D.   Project characteristics

34. The project manager has just determined that three functional managers with a high
    interest in the project hold a particularly high degree of influence in the allocation of
    enterprise resources. In what activity is the project manager involved?
    A. Developing the resource plan
    B.   Developing the stakeholder engagement plan
    C.   Determining team assignments
    D.   Identifying stakeholders
10        Chapter 1       Initiating (Domain 1.0)



 35. You are very interested in becoming a project manager. You have mentored with other
     experienced project managers in your organization to learn more about how to be an
     effective project manager. You've been told your organizational skills and communication
     skills are excellent. However, you need some additional training in accounting and
     budgeting skills, because you are weak in these general management areas. The mentor
     who was honest enough to tell you this explained it which of the following ways?
     A. You will not be able to sit for the PMP exam unless you get formal training in the
        general management areas.
     B.   General management skills are likely to affect project outcomes. If you lack any of
          these skills, it could affect your project and your career adversely, so you should get
          some training in these areas.
     C.   The Estimating Costs and Control Costs processes are under the Planning process
          group, and you will not be able to pass the questions on the PMP exam that pertain to
          these processes if you don't get some training.
     D.   General management skills are important to your project outcomes, and Estimating
          Costs and Control Costs are two of the most important processes within the
          Executing phase of a project, so you should get some training in these areas.

 36. A project manager is in the process of documenting how the team will be acquired,
     managed, and then released. The project manager is performing a process from which
     Knowledge Area?
     A. Project Procurement Management
     B.   Project Integration Management
     C.   Project Stakeholder Management
     D.   Project Resource Management

 37. Which project management document provides the project manager with the authority to
     apply organizational resources to project activities?
     A. Project management plan
     B.   Resource management plan
     C.   Project charter
     D.   Business case

 38. The project phases together constitute which of the following?
     A. Project phases
     B.   Project management plan
     C.   Project life cycle
     D.   Project management

 39. Ralph is a project manager for Storm Health. He has struggled since joining the company,
     and his manager has noticed a gap in a critical PM skill. In a recent kick-off meeting, he
     struggled to answer questions on how the project aligns with the organization's goals,
     insisting it wasn't relevant. What critical skill should Ralph sharpen?
     A. Business management and strategic skills
     B.   Technical project management skills
                                                Chapter 1        Initiating (Domain 1.0)         11



    C.   Communication skills
    D.   Leadership skills

40. A portfolio manager is leading a project portfolio planning exercise to determine which
    projects will move forward in the new quarter that support the strategic goals of the
    portfolio. She decides to use a scoring model to rate projects against the following three
    criteria: profit potential, ease of use, marketability. Based on the table provided, which
    project will likely move forward?

                                                     *Project            *Project      *Project
    Criteria                           Weight        A score             B score       C score
    Profit potential                      5              5                   2             1
    Marketability                         1              1                   5             3
    Ease of use                           3              2                   3             5
    Weighted score                       --              --                 --             --
    *5 being the highest score

    A. Project A
    B.   Project B
    C.   Project C
    D.   None

41. You are a contract project manager and have entered into the requirements-gathering
    phase of your project. Two of the departments you're working with on this project have
    competing interests regarding this project and have done everything they can, including
    sabotage, to undermine the work so far. To finish up the requirements-gathering phase,
    you will have to exert some influence. Which of the following statements is not true
    regarding influencing the organization?
    A. Influencing entails the ability to get things done.
    B.   Influencing requires an understanding of the formal and informal structures of the
         organization, including the use of power and politics.
    C.   Politics involves getting the people in these two departments to do things they
         wouldn't otherwise do.
    D.   Power entails getting these two departments with competing interests cooperating
         effectively to achieve the goals of the project.

42. You are a project manager and are meeting with your team. The goal of this meeting is to
    determine which processes you should use to effectively manage the project. Which of the
    following describes what you're doing?
    A. Progressive elaboration
    B.   Tailoring
    C.   Phase sequencing
    D.   Program management
12        Chapter 1      Initiating (Domain 1.0)



 43. Which environmental factor should you pay close attention to when carrying out the
     Identify Stakeholders process?
     A. Lessons learned and historical repositories
     B.   Company culture and organizational structure
     C.   Existing policies, procedures, and guidelines
     D.   Stakeholder registers from past similar projects

 44. You are a full-time project manager working within the customer operations organization,
     reporting to the VP of customer solutions. Your boss manages the project budget. Which
     organizational structure do you work in?
     A. Functional
     B.   Hybrid
     C.   Project-oriented
     D.   PMO

 45. A project manager is putting together the project charter and is interested in referencing
     marketplace conditions to understand the factors surrounding the project. What is a valid
     input that the project manager can reference to get this information?
     A. Organizational process assets
     B.   Enterprise environmental factors
     C.   Project documents
     D.   Lessons learned register

 46. You work for Star Bank as a project manager. Your project is so large and risky that you're
     not certain the organization should undertake it. You propose conducting a feasibility
     study, as its own project, to examine the benefits of the new proposed project. The
     feasibility study is approved and begun. Which of the following statements is not true
     regarding this project?
     A. The Initiating processes occur at the beginning of the project, when chances for a
        successful completion are high and the staffing levels are low.
     B.   The Initiating processes acknowledge that the next project phase should begin. Costs
          are low in this process, while the risks are high.
     C.   The Initiating processes is where approval is granted to undertake the project and the
          organization's resources are authorized to begin work.
     D.   The Initiating processes acknowledge that the next project phase should begin. The
          stakeholders have the most influence over the product or service of the project during
          this process.
                                               Chapter 1      Initiating (Domain 1.0)         13



47. You are the project manager for a company that produces mobile phone applications.
    Currently, the director of the consumer division is evaluating two projects. Funding exists
    for only one project. Project UV aims to produce a mobile phone application that sends
    alerts when the UV rays are at dangerous levels, alerting users to stay indoors; Project Fun
    aims to send alerts when it detects that users have not visited any destinations outside of
    their usual routine. The director asks you to calculate the payback period and NPV for
    both projects, and here is what you derive:
    Project UV: The payback period is 12 months, and the NPV is (100).
    Project Fun: The payback period is 18 months, and the NPV is 250.
    Which project would you recommend to the director?
    A. Project UV, because the payback period is shorter than Project Fun
    B.   Project Fun, because the NPV is a positive number
    C.   Project UV, because the NPV is a negative number
    D.   Project Fun, because the NPV is a higher number than Project UV

48. Which method of analyzing stakeholders considers power, urgency, and legitimacy?
    A. Stakeholder cube
    B.   Salience model
    C.   Power/interest grid
    D.   Power/influence grid

49. Plan Schedule Management, Estimate Activity Durations, and Control Schedule are
    processes that belong to what project management Knowledge Area?
    A. Project Time Management
    B.   Project Integration Management
    C.   Project Schedule Management
    D.   Project Resource Management

50. All of the following make up the PMI Talent TriangleTM except for which one?
    A. Communication skills
    B.   Business management and strategic skills
    C.   Technical project management skills
    D.   Leadership skills

51. All of the following are true regarding project phases except for which one?
    A. Project phases generally consist of segments of work that allow for easier
       management, planning, and control.
    B.   PMOs may have predefined phases based on stakeholder or management needs.
    C.   Phases are described by attributes, such as name, number, duration, and resource
         requirements.
    D.   Project phases generally do not produce deliverables by the end of the phase.
14        Chapter 1      Initiating (Domain 1.0)



 52. A project team is using iterations within the project to introduce new functionality
     and complete the project deliverables. What development life cycle is the project team
     following?
     A. Predictive
     B.   Iterative
     C.   Incremental
     D.   Hybrid

 53. Sue is the head of an enterprise project management office (PMO). She delivers a
     presentation at the annual company meeting to describe her roles, responsibilities, and the
     value of the PMO. As part of her presentation, she outlines the general responsibilities of
     a PMO. All of the following describe the types of support that PMOs typically provide
     except for which one?
     A. Establishing the company's strategic objectives and selecting projects that realize
        those objectives
     B.   Providing an established project management methodology, including templates,
          forms, and standards
     C.   Mentoring, coaching, and training project managers
     D.   Facilitating communication within and across projects

 54. All of the following statements describe the Project Scope Management Knowledge Area
     except which one?
     A. It's concerned with defining all of the work of the project.
     B.   It has six processes.
     C.   Its processes occur in four of the five project management process groups.
     D.   It's similar to Project Quality Management in that both Knowledge Areas are
          concerned with the product of the project meeting the requirements of the project.

 55. The project manager has just determined that three functional managers with a high
     interest in the project hold a particularly high degree of influence in the allocation of
     enterprise resources. Where is the project manager likely to document this information?
     A. Stakeholder analysis
     B.   Resource management plan
     C.   Stakeholder engagement plan
     D.   Stakeholder register

 56. Change-driven life cycles are also known by what other name?
     A. Adaptive life cycle
     B.   Predictive life cycle
     C.   Plan-driven life cycle
     D.   Hybrid life cycle
                                                   Chapter 1      Initiating (Domain 1.0)      15



57. You are in the Initiate phase of your project and have just begun the process of identifying
    stakeholders. What documents can you use to help get you started?
    A. Agreements and business case.
    B.   Stakeholder register and risk register.
    C.   Stakeholder register and matrix.
    D.   None. Interviews are your only hope.

58. Which of the following represents characteristics of the Planning process group?
    A. Costs are high.
    B.   Staffing is lowest.
    C.   Chance for successful project completion is medium.
    D.   Stakeholder influence is high.

59. Reasons to Lyv is the top client of a large marketing firm. Trudy is the president of
    Reasons to Lyv and has decided to launch a product that leverages new GPS tracking
    technology. She has high confidence that the project will be a success and asks the
    marketing firm to make it their top priority by generating a unique campaign that will
    run in parallel with her project. Billy, a top executive from the marketing company, briefs
    his team about this unique situation that they have not managed before, and a project is
    launched shortly thereafter. Billy's project came about as a result of what?
    A. Strategic opportunity
    B.   Environmental considerations
    C.   Technological advance
    D.   Customer request

60. You have just started working for a new company. Your previous project management
    experience made you stand out from your competitors. Your new business cards are being
    printed with the title of Project Coordinator. You discover that the project charter for the
    project you are working on was never written, so you volunteer to draft one, even though
    the work of the project has started. The vendor who is assisting with the project is already
    on board and is working with (and reporting to) the Engineering division. You report to
    the Construction division. Which of the following is true?
    A. You are working in a weak matrix organization and are in the Executing phase of
       the project.
    B.   You are working in a strong matrix organization and are in the Initiating phase
         of the project.
    C.   You are working in a strong matrix organization and are in the Executing phase of
         the project.
    D.   You are working in a weak matrix organization and are in the Planning phase of
         the project.
16        Chapter 1      Initiating (Domain 1.0)



 61. You are the project manager for a large project. The initial project schedule shows the
     project takes approximately three years to complete. Some of the stakeholders have
     changed over the course of this project, and new stakeholders will become involved toward
     the end of the project. The project team members have also changed as the project has
     evolved into a new set of deliverables. You are having a difficult time motivating the new
     team members. The techniques you used with the previous team don't seem to be working
     with this team. More resources will be brought on and off the project team at various
     stages throughout the life cycle, so you'd like to resolve this problem soon. You know from
     studying the Project Resource Management Knowledge Area that you should do which of
     the following?
     A. The processes in this Knowledge Area ensure that the human and material resources
        involved on the project are used in the most effective way possible.
     B.   The same communication style should be used throughout the life of the project.
     C.   You will change the techniques used to motivate, lead, and coach the human resources
          involved on the project as the project progresses.
     D.   This Knowledge Area's processes include Acquire Resources, Develop Team, and
          Manage Team.

 62. The project sponsor has approached you with a dilemma. The CEO announced at the
     annual stockholders' meeting that the project you're managing will be completed by the
     end of this year. The problem is that this is six months prior to the scheduled completion
     date. It's too late to go back and correct her mistake, and stockholders are expecting
     implementation by the announced date. You must speed up the delivery date of this
     project. Your primary constraint before this occurred was the budget. What actions can
     you take to help speed up the project?
     A. Hire more resources to get the work completed faster.
     B.   Ask for more money so that you can contract out one of the phases you had planned
          to do with in-house resources.
     C.   Utilize negotiation and influencing skills to convince the project sponsor to speak
          with the CEO and make a correction to her announcement.
     D.   Examine the project plan to see whether there are any phases that can be fast tracked
          and then revise the project plan to reflect the compression of the schedule.

 63. You are in the midst of performing the Project Cost Management Knowledge Area. You
     discover there are two competing alternatives to decide between. You can hire a contractor
     to build one of the project's deliverables, or you can buy the deliverable from an overseas
     supplier. Both options require acquisition, operating, and disposal costs that you compare
     between the two alternatives to make a decision. What is this technique called?
     A. Value engineering
     B.   Life-cycle costing
                                                 Chapter 1      Initiating (Domain 1.0)            17



    C.   Earned value management
    D.   Financial analysis

64. All of the following statements are true regarding NPV except which one?
    A. NPV assumes reinvestment at the cost of capital.
    B.   Projects with NPV greater than zero should receive a go decision.
    C.   NPV is the discount rate when IRR equals zero.
    D.   Projects with high returns early on should be favored over projects with low returns
         early on.

65. Project selection methods might include all of the following except for which one?
    A. Benefit measurement methods
    B.   Constrained optimization analysis
    C.   NPV calculations
    D.   Alternatives analysis

66. All of the following are considered to be factors that influence the initiation of a project
    except for which one?
    A. Compliance, legal requirements, or social requirements
    B.   Stakeholder needs and requests
    C.   Enhancement of existing operations
    D.   Improvement of processes, services, or products

67. You are a project manager working on contract for an upscale retail toy store. Your project
    involves implementing a Party Event Planner department in stores in 12 locations across
    the country as a pilot to determine whether this will be a profitable new service all the
    stores should offer. You've identified two alternative methods of implementing the pilot.
    Alternative A's initial investment equals $598,000. The PV of the expected cash inflows is
    $300,000 in year 1 and $300,000 in year 2. The cost of capital is 12 percent. Alternative
    B's initial investment equals $625,000. The PV of Alternative B's expected cash inflows is
    $323,000 in year 1 and $300,000 in year 2. The cost of capital is 9 percent. Which of the
    following is true?
    A. Alternative A will earn a return of at least 12 percent.
    B.   Alternative B will earn a return of at least 9 percent.
    C.   The return is not known for either Alternative A or Alternative B.
    D.   Both alternatives are viable choices.
18        Chapter 1      Initiating (Domain 1.0)



 68. You work in the pharmaceutical industry, and your organization is considering building
     a new laboratory facility in the Northwest. Market demand is driving new research for
     diet medications, and the new lab would be dedicated to this product development project.
     Some stakeholders in your organization are not certain a new lab facility is needed because
     there is space that can be used in an existing building to host the diet medication research
     project. You've conducted a feasibility study, and the results show two possible ways to
     meet the space needs. Which of the following is true regarding this situation?
     A. Project selection methods are used by executive managers to determine things such as
        public perception, financial return, customer loyalty, and so on, and are used only to
        choose among alternative projects.
     B.   Project selection methods are used before the Develop Project Charter process to
          choose among alternative ways of performing a project.
     C.   Project selection methods are concerned with the type of things executive managers
          think about, such as public perception, financial return, customer loyalty, and market
          share.
     D.   Project selection methods are an output of an Initiating group process that can be
          used to choose among alternative ways of doing a project. Project managers are
          generally involved with selecting among alternative projects.

 69. You've taken over a project that's currently in trouble. You've held a meeting with the key
     stakeholders to demonstrate the new product prototype. They came prepared with the
     product requirements and upon inspection inform you that this prototype is not what the
     customer specified. Your boss instructs you to get the prototype corrected and make it
     match the requirements the customer specified before holding a demo with the customer.
     She also warns you to take a look at the work of the project. She's concerned that things
     aren't happening as planned and that the last project manager was not paying close enough
     attention to the project plan. Corrections might be needed. What Knowledge Area does
     this describe?
     A. Project Schedule Management
     B.   Project Scope Management
     C.   Project Integration Management
     D.   Project Risk Management

 70. All of the following processes belong to the Project Integration Management Knowledge
     Area except for which one?
     A. Manage Project Knowledge
     B.   Identify Stakeholders
     C.   Monitor and Control Project Work
     D.   Close Project or Phase
                                                Chapter 1      Initiating (Domain 1.0)          19



71. Your project selection committee is considering four projects. Project A's NPV is positive,
    it has an IRR of 14 percent, and the payback period is 21 months. Project B's NPV is
    negative, it has an IRR of 9 percent, and the payback period is 16 months. Project C's
    NPV is positive, it has an IRR of 16 percent, and the payback period is 18 months. Project
    D's NPV is negative, it has an IRR of 16 percent, and the payback period is 13 months.
    Which project should you choose?
    A. Project A
    B.   Project B
    C.   Project C
    D.   Project D

72. You are a senior manager overseeing projects for Fun Days Vacation Packages. You
    manage groups of projects and weigh the value of each project against the business's
    strategic objectives. You also monitor projects to make certain they adhere to those
    objectives and that you get the most efficient use of resources possible. Which of the
    following does this scenario describe?
    A. Project and program management
    B.   Project management
    C.   Program management
    D.   Portfolio management

73. You have used several cash flow methods to determine alternative ways of performing your
    current project. Which of the following do you know is true regarding the results of your
    cash flow analysis?
    A. Payback period and IRR will generally give you the same accept/reject decision.
    B.   NPV and discounted cash flows will generally give you the same accept/reject
         decision.
    C.   Payback period and discounted cash flows will generally give you the same accept/
         reject decision.
    D.   NPV and IRR will generally give you the same accept/reject decision.

74. You are working on the creation of a new television series. Your organization has created
    many winning series in the past. However, no other series on the air is like the series that's
    being proposed. The series must be ready to debut during sweeps week in November.
    Which of the following statements is true?
    A. This is a project, because the series is unique and it has a definite beginning and
       ending date.
    B.   This is an ongoing operation, because the organization exists to create television
         series.
    C.   This is an ongoing operation, because the series will be on the air for many years. It's
         not temporary.
    D.   This is not a unique product, because the organization exists to create television
         series.
20        Chapter 1       Initiating (Domain 1.0)



 75. The Project Stakeholder Management Knowledge Area is concerned with which of the
     following?
     A. Identifying all of the stakeholders associated with the project and strategizing how to
        effectively engage them
     B.   Identifying all of the stakeholders associated with the project and strategizing how to
          exceed their expectations
     C.   Identifying all of the stakeholders associated with the project and strategizing against
          those that can derail the project
     D.   Identifying all of the stakeholders associated with the project and strategizing how to
          control them

 76. You are working on the creation of a new television series. The producer for this series
     has informed you that he is the final decision-maker for all questions that arise during the
     course of the series. He tells you that he'll set up a meeting with you to discuss the budget
     he's set aside for the project. Your organization has created many winning series in the
     past, almost all of which had the same producer as the one for this project. The producer
     believes this will be the best series they have produced to date and has already generated a
     lot of excitement about this project. No other series on the air is like the series that's being
     proposed. The series must be ready to debut during sweeps week in November. Which of
     the following is true?
     A. The producer's only involvement on the project is to provide funds.
     B.   The producer is the project manager.
     C.   The producer is the project sponsor.
     D.   The producer is the program manager.

 77. Antwon is the director of marketing for a midsize company. You run into him while
     heating coffee in the office kitchenette and ask him what he's up to. He explains that
     he's in the process of evaluating project proposals to determine which best support the
     department and company's annual goals. In what activity is Antwon involved?
     A. Project management
     B.   Program management
     C.   Portfolio management
     D.   Agile management

 78. The project manager reviews lessons learned from past similar projects to start the project
     off on the right foot. What input contains lessons learned and historical information from
     past projects?
     A. Organizational process assets
     B.   Enterprise environmental factors
     C.   Project documents
     D.   Lessons learned register
                                               Chapter 1      Initiating (Domain 1.0)          21



79. All of the following statements are true except for which one?
    A. Estimate Activity Resources is a key step in developing the schedule and is a process
       belonging to the Project Schedule Management Knowledge Area.
    B.   Plan Resource Management, Estimate Costs, and Control Procurements are all
         project management processes.
    C.   Project Integration Management, Project Scope Management, and Project Schedule
         Management are examples of project management Knowledge Areas.
    D.   There are a total of 49 project management processes.

80. Your project selection committee is evaluating three projects. They are using a weighted
    scoring model that has three criteria: decrease training time, streamline customer support
    functions, and return on investment. The weights for these criteria are 5, 4, and 2,
    respectively. Your selection committee has finished scoring the three projects and has given
    you the scores for the three criteria. They are as follows:
         Project 1: decrease training = 5, streamline support = 3, return on investment = 5
         Project 2: decrease training = 3, streamline support = 5, return on investment = 5
         Project 3: decrease training = 4, streamline support = 4, return on investment = 3
    Which project should you choose based on the scores from the weighted scoring model?
    A. Project 3
    B.   Project 2
    C.   Project 1
    D.   There isn't enough information in the question to determine an answer.

81. Sue is the head of an enterprise project management office (PMO). She has been given a
    high degree of authority within the company, and project managers report directly to the
    PMO. What type of PMO does Sue lead?
    A. Supportive
    B.   Controlling
    C.   Directive
    D.   There isn't enough information in the question to determine an answer.

82. All of the following are examples of constrained optimization methods except for
    which one?
    A. Economic models
    B.   Integer
    C.   Dynamic
    D.   Multi-objective programming
22        Chapter 1       Initiating (Domain 1.0)



 83. Which of the following is true about benefit-cost ratio?
     A. It is the quickest and least precise project selection method.
     B.   It uses algorithms to calculate the ratio.
     C.   Benefit-cost ratio is the most difficult equation to calculate.
     D.   Benefit-cost ratio is also known as cost-benefit analysis.

 84. All of the following are true regarding projects except for which one?
     A. They are temporary in nature.
     B.   They can be progressively elaborated.
     C.   They produce unique products, services, or results.
     D.   They can continue without an ending date.

 85. Which of the following project management Knowledge Areas involve every team member
     and stakeholder on the project?
     A. Project Scope Management
     B.   Project Communications Management
     C.   Project Resource Management
     D.   Project Quality Management

 86. Roshoud is the VP of customer operations for Galactic Kidz and project sponsor of the
     latest project, called Project G. He sits down with Sally, the project manager, to discuss
     and document roles and responsibilities. What Knowledge Area are they engaged in?
     A. Project Integration Management
     B.   Project Procurement Management
     C.   Project Resource Management
     D.   Project Stakeholder Management

 87. What is the present value of $8,000 received three years from the present using a 7 percent
     interest rate? Assume all options are rounded to the nearest whole dollar.
     A. $9,800
     B.   $6,530
     C.   $9,680
     D.   $6,612

 88. Which of the following is a valid tool or technique that aids the project manager, or other
     assigned organizational resource, in developing the project charter?
     A. Brainstorming
     B.   Business case
                                               Chapter 1      Initiating (Domain 1.0)         23



    C.   Enterprise environmental factors
    D.   Organizational process assets

89. Who is responsible for determining which processes within each process group are
    appropriate for the project?
    A. The project manager
    B.   The project team
    C.   The project manager and project sponsor
    D.   The project manager and project team

90. Carina is a principal project manager of You've Got Dogs, a specialty company that
    creates custom dog apparel and toys. She has just concluded the Design phase and is
    scheduled to perform a phase review with the steering committee facilitated by the
    company's PMO. Phase reviews are also called by what other name?
    A. Kill point
    B.   End point
    C.   PMO review
    D.   Project review

91. You are a project manager for the information technology division of a local satellite TV
    broadcasting company. This spring, the chief information officer for your company gave
    you the job of converting and upgrading all the PCs in the department to the latest release
    of a specific desktop application. Prior to this conversion, all manner of desktop software
    existed on machines throughout the company and had caused increasing problems with
    sharing files and information across the company. A lot of unproductive hours were spent
    converting information into several formats. This project came about as a result of which
    of the following?
    A. Business need
    B.   Market demand
    C.   Technological advance
    D.   Social need

92. Two project managers preparing for the PMP exam sat and debated over the various ways
    that project life-cycle phases could be performed. The project managers would be covering
    all of the following except for which one?
    A. Sequential
    B.   Fast tracked
    C.   Iterative
    D.   Overlapping
24        Chapter 1      Initiating (Domain 1.0)



 93. You've decided to branch out into project management consulting and have landed
     your first contracting assignment. You are working on an exciting project for a midsize
     company that provides pet-sitting services in people's homes. The employee who is the
     designated project manager on this project doesn't have much experience running projects.
     He insists that all the stakeholders have been identified and that he alone understands their
     expectations so there is no need for you to meet with them. As a more experienced project
     manager, you know which of the following is true?
     A. He is correct. You do not need to meet with the stakeholders as long as they have been
        identified. His knowledge of their expectations alone is sufficient.
     B.   You should meet with the stakeholders. Project Communications Management
          is concerned with documenting the needs and demands of the stakeholders and
          capturing this information in the project scope statement.
     C.   You do not need to meet with the stakeholders since they have already been identified.
          You can meet them when you capture their requirements in the Collect Requirements
          process, which is part of the Project Integration Management Knowledge Area.
     D.   You should meet with the stakeholders, identify them, assess their needs, and record
          their expectations as part of the Project Stakeholder Management Knowledge Area.

 94. You are a project manager for Wedding Planners, Inc. Since every wedding is unique, your
     organization believes in managing each one as a project. You've come up with a great
     idea for a new event that you're certain customers will love and that will also profit the
     company. Your boss asks you to investigate alternative methods for implementing the new
     idea and come back with a recommendation. You discover that Alternative A could yield
     revenues of $21 million over the next two years, while Alternative B could yield revenues
     of $29 million over three years. The finance manager told you to use 5 percent as the cost
     of capital. Which project should you choose and why?
     A. Alternative A, because the discounted cash flows are $19,047,619 while the
        discounted cash flows for Alternative B are $25,051,831.
     B.   Alternative B, because its yield is higher than Alternative A's yield.
     C.   Alternative B, because the discounted cash flows are $26,303,854 while the
          discounted cash flows for Alternative A are $19,047,619.
     D.   Alternative B, because the discounted cash flows are $20,000,000 for Alternative A
          while the discounted cash flows for Alternative B are $27,619,047.

 95. Which of the following statements describe the project management Knowledge
     Areas?
     A. Include Initiation, Planning, Executing, Monitoring and Controlling, and Closing.
     B.   Consist of 10 areas that bring together processes that have things in common.
     C.   Consist of five processes that bring together phases of projects that have things
          in common.
     D.   Include Planning, Executing, and Monitoring and Controlling processes because these
          three processes are commonly interlinked.
                                                Chapter 1      Initiating (Domain 1.0)             25



96. You are a project manager for Rhone Valley Importers. Your buyer has found a new
    product that she's convinced will sell well in this country. Taking on this new product
    introduces considerable opportunity for the company but at the same time is also a
    considerable threat. The cost of this product exceeds anything your company has imported
    before, and if it doesn't sell as well as the buyer thinks it will, the company could go into
    bankruptcy. You determine that a feasibility study is in order. Which of the following
    statements is not true?
    A. A feasibility study should be conducted to determine the potential market, costs,
       risks, and other factors.
    B.   One purpose of the feasibility study is to determine marketing demand for the new
         product that could in turn become the demand that drives the project.
    C.   During the feasibility study, you could use the Project Risk Management processes
         to identify all opportunities and exploit their possibilities, determine the potential
         threats, and minimize the probability and consequences of those threats.
    D.   One of the end results of the feasibility study might be to produce a project charter
         that will include a description of the intended outcome of the project, a budget, and a
         detailed project schedule for management review.

97. Your selection committee can choose only one of the following projects: Project A's
    original investment is $1 million, the present value of the cash inflows is $1 million, and
    the discount rate is 4 percent. Project B's original investment is $1.4 million, the present
    value of the cash inflows is $1.4 million, and the discount rate is 6 percent. Project C's
    original investment is $1.8 million, the present value of the cash inflows is $1.8 million,
    and the discount rate is 7 percent. Which project should the committee choose?
    A. Project C
    B.   Project B
    C.   Project A
    D.   There isn't enough information in the question to determine an answer.

98. A project manager has been asked to calculate the payback period for her project. The
    project's investment is $500,000, with expected cash inflow of $50,000 for the first two
    quarters and $100,000 for every quarter thereafter. What is the payback period?
    A. 6 months
    B.   12 months
    C.   18 months
    D.   24 months

99. Your selection committee can choose only one of the following projects: Project A's
    original investment is $1 million, and the payback period is 18 months. Project B's original
    investment is $1.4 million, and the payback period is 18 months. Project C's original
    investment is $1.8 million, and the payback period is 18 months. Which project should the
    committee choose?
    A. Project A
    B.   Project B
    C.   Project C
    D.   There isn't enough information in the question to determine an answer.
26        Chapter 1        Initiating (Domain 1.0)



100. Nicolas is the project manager of a project that has been described as revolutionizing the
     mobile fitness tracking industry. After consulting with his team of subject-matter experts,
     he decides to use Agile project management. Nicolas's project team continues to build on
     the product through two-week iterations. Iterations are also known by what other name?
     A. Phase
     B.   Sprint
     C.   Deliverable
     D.   Stand-up

101. All of the following statements are true except for which one?
     A. A highly predictive life cycle has reduced risk and costs due to detailed plans.
     B.   A highly predictive life cycle contains requirements that are progressively elaborated.
     C.   A highly adaptive life cycle has continuous involvement and frequent feedback from
          stakeholders.
     D.   A highly adaptive life cycle performs Initiating activities regularly throughout
          the project.

102. A project manager performing Closing activities is currently focused on addressing the
     highest business value items first. What life cycle is she using to deliver her project?
     A. Highly predictive
     B.   Adaptive
     C.   Highly adaptive
     D.   Waterfall

103. Quincy and Michael are two executives of Widgets for Life, a company providing the
     latest cool lifestyle gadgets. They've learned that a new federal law will be passed that
     regulates how personal data may be collected and used. Many of Widgets for Life's
     gadgets collect data, which has been made possible by advancements in technology. As a
     result, they decide to launch a new project that will address the requirements of the new
     law. This project came about as a result of what need?
     A. Federal request
     B.   Legal requirement
     C.   Technological advance
     D.   Organizational need

104. Kaylee is a risk manager working in collaboration with Alyssa, a project manager,
     and both work for a top healthcare company. They partner to facilitate a session to
     determine how the project team can best exploit an opportunity that was recently
     identified. Kaylee and Alyssa are performing activities associated with what project
     management Knowledge Area?
     A. Project Integration Management
     B.   Project Risk Management
     C.   Project Scope Management
     D.   Project Procurement Management
                                                Chapter 1      Initiating (Domain 1.0)          27



105. A method of managing projects in small, incremental portions of work that can be easily
     assigned and completed within a short period of time describes what methodology?
     A. Waterfall
     B.   Lean
     C.   Agile
     D.   Iterative

106. Which of the following best describes how Planning activities are performed in a highly
     adaptive (Agile) life cycle?
     A. Once the plan is approved, changes that impact scope, time, or budget are controlled
        and minimized.
     B.   Progressive elaboration of scope based on continuous feedback
     C.   High-level plan developed and elaborated as project progresses
     D.   Work is performed as requirements are defined.

107. A business analyst has just facilitated a requirements-gathering session. The following
     week, the project manager begins the process of capturing and documenting the project's
     deliverables and creating a work breakdown structure. The business analyst and project
     manager are carrying out processes that belong to which of the following Knowledge
     Areas?
     A. Project Schedule Management
     B.   Project Integration Management
     C.   Project Requirements Management
     D.   Project Scope Management

108. After meeting with several subject-matter experts, the project manager determines that the
     project phases will need to occur one after the other. What project life cycle is the project
     manager using?
     A. Sequential
     B.   Overlapping
     C.   Iterative
     D.   Incremental

109. Which of the following best describes the role of a product owner within the Agile
     methodology?
     A. The product owner coordinates the work of the sprint and runs interference between
        the team and distractions keeping them from their work.
     B.   The product owner has a vested interest in the project or the outcomes of the project
          and interfaces with stakeholders.
     C.   The product owner represents the stakeholders and is the liaison between the
          stakeholders, the scrum master, and the development team.
     D.   The product owner is responsible for completing the backlog items and signing up for
          tasks based on priorities established.
28        Chapter 1        Initiating (Domain 1.0)



110. During the first project kick-off meeting, Ron introduces himself to key team members,
     noting that he will work hard to minimize distractions that may keep them from their
     work at hand and will serve in more of a facilitator role. What is Ron's role?
     A. Scrum master
     B.   Product owner
     C.   Stakeholder
     D.   Team member

111. A project manager following an Agile life cycle receives a request from the customer to
     alter a requirement. How will the project manager likely respond?
     A. Blocks change
     B.   Welcomes change
     C.   Prevents change
     D.   Indifferent about change

112. All of the following statements are true except for which one?
     A. Operations involves work that is continuous without an ending date.
     B.   Projects are temporary but can extend over multiple years.
     C.   Progressive elaboration refers to a deferral in planning.
     D.   A project can evolve into ongoing operations.

113. Which of the following project selection methods is considered to be the least precise?
     A. Payback period
     B.   Benefit-cost ratio
     C.   Scoring models
     D.   Net present value

114. A product owner calls the scrum master and requests to see the remaining work effort for
     the sprint. What is the scrum manager likely to show the product owner in response?
     A. A bubble chart
     B.   A status report
     C.   A burn-down chart
     D.   A sprint summary chart

115. You are a project manager reporting to the director of operations. You navigate to the
     department's PMO intranet set to download the latest project charter template. What type
     of PMO is this?
     A. Supportive
     B.   Controlling
                                                Chapter 1        Initiating (Domain 1.0)        29



     C.   Directive
     D.   There isn't enough information in the question to determine an answer.

116. At what point in the project life cycle do costs peak?
     A. Initiating
     B.   Planning
     C.   Executing
     D.   Closing

117. Reasons to Lyv is the top client of a large marketing firm. Trudy is the president of
     Reasons to Lyv and has decided to launch a product that leverages new GPS tracking
     technology. She has high confidence that the project will be a success and asks the
     marketing firm to make it their top priority by generating a unique campaign that will
     run in parallel with her project. Billy, a top executive from the marketing company, briefs
     his team about this unique situation that they have not managed before, and a project is
     launched shortly thereafter. Trudy's project came about as a result of what?
     A. Strategic opportunity
     B.   Environmental considerations
     C.   Technological advance
     D.   Customer request

118. Agile project management can best be described as which of the following?
     A. A method that focuses on defining the requirements of the project early on in the
        project life cycle, before moving into execution
     B.   An underlying concept that shows the integrative nature of the process groups that
          notes that each element in the life cycle is results-oriented
     C.   A method of managing projects through large portions of work that can be easily
          planned and executed to produce the overall product, service, or result of the project
     D.   A method of managing projects in small, incremental portions of work that can be
          easily assigned, easily managed, and completed within a short period of time called
          iterations

119. All of the following are examples of formal project management Knowledge Areas except
     for which one?
     A. Project Requirements Management
     B.   Project Integration Management
     C.   Project Procurement Management
     D.   Project Stakeholder Management
30        Chapter 1       Initiating (Domain 1.0)



120. During a company town hall, the sponsor of your project announced that a new high-
     priority project will be kicking off in the next quarter. This is distressing news since
     resources are at a premium. You kick into preventive measures and pull together subject-
     matter experts to begin analyzing a way to compress the project schedule to complete
     the project prior to the next project launch. What activity are you and the subject-matter
     experts performing?
     A. Agile development
     B.   Overlapping
     C.   Fast tracking
     D.   Iterative development

121. Project Integration Management, Project Scope Management, and Project Cost
     Management are all examples of what?
     A. Project management process groups
     B.   Project management processes
     C.   Project management Knowledge Areas
     D.   Project Life Cycle Phases

122. Waterfall, Agile, and PRINCE2 are all examples of what?
     A. A set of project management standards
     B.   Methods of managing a project
     C.   Global practices for managing projects
     D.   Project management tools and techniques

123. Many projects fail because of conflicts among stakeholders. Conflict often exists because
     of which of the following?
     A. Conflicting interests
     B.   Human bias
     C.   Varying experiences
     D.   Varying personalities

124. A scrum master brings the team together at 9 a.m. sharp every morning. He asks the
     team the following questions: What did you accomplish yesterday? What will you work
     on today? Do you have any roadblocks or issues preventing you from doing your work?
     What activity is the team engaged in?
     A. A status meeting
     B.   A daily roundup
     C.   A sprint planning meeting
     D.   A daily stand-up
                                                 Chapter 1      Initiating (Domain 1.0)         31



125. A short, time-bound period of work is also referred to as which of the following?
     A. Buffer
     B.   Lead
     C.   Lag
     D.   Sprint

126. Which of the following best describes project management Knowledge Areas?
     A. Knowledge Areas collectively form the project life cycle.
     B.   Knowledge Areas bring together processes that have characteristics in common.
     C.   Knowledge Areas are groupings of project management processes.
     D.   Knowledge Areas organize the development life cycle into distinct groupings of
          activities.

127. Sue is the head of an enterprise project management office (PMO). She delivers a
     presentation at the annual company meeting to describe her role's responsibilities and the
     value of the PMO. As part of her presentation, Sue stresses the critical skill sets that PMs
     must have in order to be effective. She stresses one in particular, which is that PMs must
     exhibit the knowledge, skills, and behaviors needed to guide, motivate, and direct a team.
     What skill set is Sue referring to?
     A. Communication skills
     B.   Leadership skills
     C.   Business management and strategic skills
     D.   Technical project management skills

128. Your project selection committee is meeting later this week and is considering initiating
     one of two projects. They've asked you to recommend the project that will benefit the
     organization the most. The information you've gathered shows the initial investment
     for Project 1 is $795,000. Monthly cash inflows for the first year are $44,000, and
     expected cash inflows beginning in year 2 are $156,000 per quarter. Project 2 has an
     initial investment of $845,000. Expected quarterly inflows for the first year are $180,000.
     Beginning in the second year, inflows are expected to be $136,000 per quarter. Which
     project should you recommend to the committee and why?
     A. Project 1, because it has a payback period of 18 months, which is shorter than Project
        2's payback period
     B.   Project 2, because it has a payback period of 15 months while Project 2 has a payback
          period of 18 months
     C.   Project 1, because it has a lower initial investment than Project 2
     D.   Project 2, because it has a payback period of 16 months while Project 1 has a payback
          period of 19 months
32        Chapter 1       Initiating (Domain 1.0)



129. After concluding the sprint, the scrum master, product owner, and team members come
     together to evaluate the overall progress and work completed and to review any lessons
     learned. This describes what type of meeting?
     A. A daily stand-up
     B.   A sprint retrospective
     C.   A scrum meeting
     D.   A sprint-planning meeting

130. When is a project considered successful?
     A. When the project budget is consumed, scope developed, and schedule milestones are
        achieved
     B.   When the project budget is consumed and schedule milestones are achieved
     C.   When project benefits are realized and stakeholder needs and expectations are met
     D.   When objectives are achieved and stakeholder needs and expectations are met

131. All of the collective phases the project progresses through from the start of the project
     through the end are called what?
     A. Project management life cycle
     B.   Phase life cycle
     C.   Product life cycle
     D.   Project life cycle

132. You have been with your company for three months. You were hired as a project manager
     and are anxious to get started on your first project. Your organization is considering
     taking on a project that has considerable risk associated with it and you don't know the
     outcome. The selection committee is meeting two weeks from today to decide on this
     project. Since you're new to the company, you want to make a good impression. Which of
     the following will you do?
     A. You make certain that the product description is documented, the strategic plan is
        considered, and historical information is researched before writing the project charter.
     B.   You make certain to pass on the information you've gathered and documented to the
          project sponsor so that she can write the project charter.
     C.   You know some of the deliverables in this project will be purchased. You will use
          EVM techniques to help optimize life-cycle costs when you get to the processes in the
          Project Cost Management Knowledge Area.
     D.   You recommend a feasibility study be conducted as a separate project from this one
          because the outcome of the project is unknown.

133. Yasmin is a project manager tasked with putting together the project charter for a project
     that will produce a new line of widgets for the company. After meeting with various key
     stakeholders, she sits down to draft the document. Yasmin is likely to include all of the
     following elements within the project charter except for which one?
     A. List of detailed risks
     B.   Purpose of the project
                                                 Chapter 1      Initiating (Domain 1.0)          33



     C.   List of key stakeholders
     D.   Preapproved budget

134. Nicolas is the project manager of a project that has been described as revolutionizing
     the mobile fitness tracking industry. After a few preliminary strategy sessions, he pulls
     together the core team and notes that they will be defining deliverables early in the
     development life cycle and progressively elaborating them as the project progresses. What
     development life cycle is Nicolas following on the project?
     A. Predictive
     B.   Iterative
     C.   Incremental
     D.   Hybrid

135. A project manager has facilitated the decomposition of work packages into activities. She
     next carries the team through several exercises to sequence the activities and determine
     what and how many resources will be needed to perform the work. What is she likely to
     do next?
     A. Estimate how long each activity will take
     B.   Develop the schedule
     C.   Run various what-if scenarios against the schedule
     D.   Break down the activities into deliverables

136. Yasmin is the project manager of a project that will produce a new line of widgets for
     the company. She guides the project team in defining the project requirements in detail
     before moving into production. Because of compliance requirements that must be met, she
     maintains a very rigid change control process for changing requirements. What method is
     Yasmin using to manage the project?
     A. Waterfall
     B.   Agile
     C.   Iterative
     D.   Scrum

137. Nancy is a senior systems engineer who loves to work with people and can typically
     grasp the big picture. Because of her functional knowledge, organized nature, and ease in
     getting others to follow her lead, her manager decides to move her into a project manager
     role. Despite all of her strengths, Nancy struggles greatly with her first project. The first
     major milestone was missed, and the project was already over budget by $20,000. What
     part of the PMI Talent TriangleTM is Nancy missing?
     A. Technical project management
     B.   Leadership
     C.   Strategic and business management
     D.   Schedule management
34        Chapter 1         Initiating (Domain 1.0)



138. Robert is a practicing project manager who is studying for his PMP exam. During a study
     session with a colleague, he insists that it is important for project managers to consider all
     49 project management processes, while his colleague insists that it is not necessary and
     that project managers should carry out only the necessary processes. Who is correct?
     A. Robert
     B.   Robert's colleague
     C.   Both
     D.   Neither

139. A portfolio manager is leading a project portfolio planning exercise to determine which
     projects will move forward in the new quarter and support the strategic goals of the
     portfolio. She decides to use a scoring model to rate projects against the following three
     criteria: profit potential, ease of use, marketability. Based on the table provided, what is
     the weighted score of project C?

                                                       *Project           *Project       *Project
      Criteria                            Weight       A score            B score        C score
      Profit potential                       5             5                 2               1
      Marketability                          1             1                 5               3
      Ease of use                            3             2                 3               5
      Weighted score                         --            --                --             --
      *5 being the highest score

     A. 9
     B.   8
     C.   25
     D.   23

140. Quincy and Michael are two executives of Widgets for Life, a company providing the
     latest cool lifestyle gadgets. As part of their annual planning process, they've opted to use
     a method that is considered to be the least precise, in combination with a scoring model.
     What two methods are they using?
     A. Scoring model and discounted cash flows
     B.   Scoring model and benefit-cost ratio
     C.   Scoring model and payback period
     D.   Scoring model and net present value
                                                Chapter 1         Initiating (Domain 1.0)        35



141. Antwon, the director of marketing, approaches you to tell you about the latest idea he
     had for a new phone app that he called Project UV2. Since he was the brain behind
     the company's top-selling app, you take him seriously. He notes that his idea involves
     enhancing the existing UV app by upgrading the back end to sit on technology that the
     company recently rolled out, thereby making response time faster. This is considered to be
     which of the following?
     A. A project
     B.   Ongoing operation
     C.   A secondary phase of Project UV
     D.   A program

142. All of the following are processes that belong to the Project Integration Management
     Knowledge Area except for which one?
     A. Develop Project Management Plan
     B.   Direct and Manage Project Work
     C.   Identify Stakeholders
     D.   Perform Integrated Change Control

143. All of the following describe a functional organizational structure except for which one?
     A. The functional manager manages the project budget.
     B.   The role of project manager is part-time.
     C.   A project manager has little or no authority.
     D.   The role of project manager can be full-time.

144. Which of the following best defines a program?
     A. A temporary endeavor undertaken to create a unique product, service, or result
     B.   Related projects, subsidiary programs, and program activities managed in a
          coordinated manner to obtain benefits not available from managing them individually
     C.   The iterative process of increasing the level of detail in a project management plan as
          greater amounts of information and more accurate estimates become available
     D.   The series of phases that represent the evolution of a product, from concept through
          delivery, growth, maturity, and to retirement

145. A project manager meets with the project sponsor for a weekly update. Company
     performance has been rocky, and the sponsor nervously asks what the chances are of
     the project coming to a successful closure. To date, the project has been on track and is
     nearing the end of Execution. How should the project manager respond?
     A. The likelihood of successful completion is high.
     B.   The likelihood of successful completion is highest.
     C.   The likelihood of successful completion is low.
     D.   The likelihood of successful completion is lowest.
36        Chapter 1      Initiating (Domain 1.0)



146. The project sponsor of a project has just met with the organization's senior executives to
     provide them with a summary of the latest project that is about to kick off. He introduces
     Yasmin, the project manager, and commits to the room of executives that the project is
     bound to be a success. Who assumes responsibility for the success of the project?
     A. Project sponsor
     B.   Senior executives
     C.   Project team
     D.   Project manager

147. Projects may come about as a result of which of the following?
     A. Ideas
     B.   Methods to exceed stakeholder expectations
     C.   Motivated employees
     D.   Needs and demands

148. Initiating, Planning, Executing, Monitoring and Controlling, and Closing are referred to
     as which of the following?
     A. Project Management phases
     B.   Project management Knowledge Areas
     C.   Project management process groups
     D.   Project Life Cycle Stages

149. Your selection committee is considering two projects. They can choose only one or
     the other. Project A's expected cash inflows are $14,000. It has a payback period of 14
     months, and IRR equals 4 percent. Project B expects cash inflows of $5,000 per quarter
     for the first 16 months, and its IRR is 2. Which project should the selection committee
     choose and why?
     A. Project A, because its payback period is shorter than Project B's
     B.   Project B, because its IRR value is less than Project A's
     C.   Project B, because the payback period is shorter than Project A's
     D.   Project A, because its IRR value is higher than Project B's

150. Which of the following best describes PMI?
     A. A nonprofit organization that focuses on project, program, and portfolio management
     B.   A for-profit organization that focuses on project, program, and portfolio management
     C.   The industry-recognized standard within the United States for project management
          practices
     D.   The industry-recognized standard for project management practices
                                                  Chapter 1      Initiating (Domain 1.0)             37



151. A program manager working for an infectious disease nonprofit has just been assigned
     to a program that seeks to solve a deadly issue plaguing a third-world country. The issue
     involves a deadly bacteria that has entered into a major water source that branches out
     into multiple regions across the country. The first project will involve a feasibility study.
     This project came about as a result of what?
     A. Strategic opportunity
     B.   Environmental considerations
     C.   Regulatory requirement
     D.   Social need

152. An assumption can best be described as which of the following?
     A. Actions that restrict or dictate the actions of the project team
     B.   Factors expected to be in place or to be in evidence
     C.   An uncertain event or condition that, if it occurs, has a positive or negative effect on
          one or more of the project's objectives
     D.   An immediate and temporary response to an issue

153. Lewis is a marketing associate reporting to Antwon, the company's director of marketing.
     He pulls you aside to get your opinion about the latest project that he claims was his
     idea. He expresses frustration that Antwon was named sponsor of the project instead of
     himself. Based on the scenario presented, who is the correct project sponsor?
     A. Lewis
     B.   Antwon
     C.   Neither
     D.   Both

154. Sue is the head of an enterprise project management office (PMO). She delivers a
     presentation at the annual company meeting to describe her role's responsibilities and the
     value of the PMO. As part of her presentation, Sue delivers an award to a project manager
     for exhibiting strength in defining critical success factors of the project, developing a
     project schedule, and knowing when to ask for help. What skill set is she recognizing the
     project manager for?
     A. Communication skills
     B.   Leadership skills
     C.   Business management and strategic skills
     D.   Technical project management skills

155. A project manager is in the process of developing the project charter. Almost immediately,
     he identifies several constraints. Where is he likely to document the constraints and
     maintain regular updates as they change throughout the project?
     A. Project charter
     B.   Business case
     C.   Risk register
     D.   Assumption log
38         Chapter 1        Initiating (Domain 1.0)



156. A portfolio manager is evaluating two projects using IRR. If Project A has an IRR of
     2 percent, Project B has an IRR of 5 percent, and Project C has an IRR of 4 percent,
     which project will the portfolio manager recommend?
      A. Project A
      B.   Project B
      C.   Project C
      D.   None

157. At what point in the project's life cycle is the risk probability of occurrence at its highest?
      A. Initiating
      B.   Planning
      C.   Executing
      D.   Closing

158. The processes that make up the project management process groups often interact and
     overlap with one another and are often performed in what way?
      A. Sequentially
      B.   Singularly
      C.   Iteratively
      D.   Progressively

159. The project manager meets with the project sponsor for the first time to discuss the
     project. In what activity are they involved?
      A. Developing the project management plan
      B.   Identifying overall project risks
      C.   Developing the project charter
      D.   Developing the project schedule

160. Who is responsible for understanding the interests and personal agendas of stakeholders?
     A. Project sponsor
     B.    Project manager
     C.    Project team
     D.    Executive sponsor
Chapter   Planning (Domain 2.0)

 2        The Project Management
          Professional (PMP)(R) exam content
          from the Planning the Project
          performance domain covered
          in this chapter includes the
          following:

           Review and assess detailed project requirements,
           constraints, and assumptions with stakeholders based
           on the project charter, lessons learned, and by using
           requirement gathering techniques in order to establish
           the project deliverables.

           Develop a scope management plan, based on the
           approved project scope and using scope management
           techniques, in order to define, maintain, and manage the
           scope of the project.

           Develop the cost management plan based upon the
           project scope, schedule, resources, approved project
           charter, and other information, using estimating
           techniques, in order to manage project costs.

           Develop the project schedule based on the approved
           project deliverables and milestones, scope, and resource
           management plans in order to manage timely completion
           of the project.

           Develop the human resource management plan by
           defining the roles and responsibilities of the project
           team members in order to create a project organizational
           structure and provide guidance regarding how resources
           will be assigned and managed.

           Develop the communications management plan based
           on the project organizational structure and stakeholder
           requirements in order to define and manage the flow of
           project information.
 Develop the procurement management plan based on the
 project scope, budget, and schedule in order to ensure
 that the required project resources will be available.

 Develop the quality management plan and define the
 quality standards for the project and its products, based
 on the project scope, risks, and requirements in order to
 prevent the occurrence of defects and reduce the cost of
 quality.

 Develop the change management plan by defining how
 changes will be addressed and controlled in order to track
 and manage change.

 Plan for risk management by developing a risk
 management plan; identifying, analyzing, and prioritizing
 project risk; creating the risk register; and defining risk
 response strategies in order to manage uncertainty and
 opportunity throughout the project life cycle.

 Present the project management plan to the relevant
 stakeholders according to applicable policies and
 procedures in order to obtain approval to proceed with
 project execution.

 Conduct kick-off meeting, communicating the start of the
 project, key milestones, and other relevant information
 in order to inform and engage stakeholders and gain
 commitment.

 Develop the stakeholder engagement plan by analyzing
 needs, interests, and potential impact in order to
 effectively manage stakeholders' expectations and
 engage them in project decisions.


               The process names, inputs, tools and tech-
               niques, outputs, and descriptions of the project
               management process groups and related materials
               and figures in this chapter are based on content
               from A Guide to the Project Management Body
               of Knowledge (PMBOK(R) Guide), Sixth Edition
               (PMI(R), 2017).
                                             Chapter 2      Planning (Domain 2.0)            41



1. The project manager develops a project management plan to describe how the project will
   be executed, monitored, controlled, and closed. Which of the following is a valid tool or
   technique to assist the project manager to assure the success of the project management
   plan?
   A. Meetings
   B.   Enterprise environmental factors
   C.   Organizational process assets
   D.   Outputs from other processes

2. A project manager is providing guidance to the project team on the steps required to
   generate the work breakdown structure (WBS). She lists the following: 1) identify the
   deliverables and work, 2) organize the WBS, 3) decompose the WBS components into
   lower-level components, and 4) assign identification codes. What is the fifth step?
   A. Identifying and assigning codes to control accounts
   B.   Decomposing the work packages into activities
   C.   Determining cost estimates at the planning package level
   D.   Verifying the degree of decomposition

3. You are sequencing activities and have just begun to identify dependencies. What can you
   use to help get you started quickly?
   A. Enterprise environmental factors
   B.   Organizational process assets
   C.   Milestone list
   D.   Scheduling tool

4. Using the information displayed in the following table, calculate the number of network
   paths.

   Activity Name                 Successor                     Duration
   A                             B, C, D                       5
   B                             E                             2
   C                             E                             10
   D                             E                             7
   E                             None                          2

   A. 5
   B.   3
   C.   4
   D.   0
42           Chapter 2      Planning (Domain 2.0)



     5. Using the information displayed in the following table, identify the critical path.

        Activity Name                  Successor                       Duration
        A                              B, C, D                         5
        B                              E                               2
        C                              E                               10
        D                              E                               7
        E                              None                            2

        A. A-B-E
        B.   A-C-E
        C.   A-D-E
        D.   A-E-D

     6. Using the information displayed in the following table, identify the near critical path.

        Activity Name                  Successor                       Duration
        A                              B, C, D                         5
        B                              E                               2
        C                              E                               10
        D                              E                               7
        E                              None                            2

        A. A-B-E
        B.   A-C-E
        C.   A-D-E
        D.   A-E-D

     7. All of the following statements about the arrow diagramming method (ADM) are true
        except for which one?
        A. In ADM, activities are placed on the arrows, which are connected to dependent
           activities with nodes.
        B.   ADM allows for multiple types of dependencies, including finish-to-start, start-to-
             finish, start-to-start, and finish-to-finish.
        C.   ADM is also referred to as activity on arrow (AOA) and activity on line (AOL).
        D.   ADM allows for more than one time estimate to determine duration.
                                                 Chapter 2      Planning (Domain 2.0)            43



 8. You are the project manager for Lucky Stars Candies. You've identified the deliverables
    and requirements and documented them where?
    A. In the project scope statement, which will be used as an input to the Create WBS
       process
    B.   In the project scope management document, which is used as an input to the Define
         Scope process
    C.   In the product requirements document, which is an output of the Define Scope
         process
    D.   In the project specifications document, which is an output of the Define Activities
         process

 9. Roshoud is the VP of customer operations for Galactic Kidz and the project sponsor
    of the latest project, called Project G. He sits down with Sally, the project manager, to
    discuss how they will respond to the risks identified. For one risk in particular, he asks
    Sally to facilitate the purchase of insurance to protect against a liability. What type of risk
    response is this?
    A. Avoid
    B.   Mitigate
    C.   Share
    D.   Transfer

10. All of the following statements pertain to the Develop Project Management Plan process
    except for which one?
    A. Develop Project Management Plan is the first process in the Planning process group
       and the first Planning process in the Project Integration Management Knowledge
       Area.
    B.   The project management plan, an output of Develop Project Management Plan,
         includes other information, such as the resource management plan and cost
         baseline.
    C.   The tools and techniques of this process include data-gathering techniques and expert
         judgment.
    D.   Develop Project Management Plan is the first process in the Planning process group
         and the first process in the Project Scope Management Knowledge Area.

11. Using a beta distribution formula, calculate the cost estimate based on the following three-
    point estimates: Optimistic = $2,500, Most Likely = $3,500, Pessimistic = $7,200.
    A. $4,400
    B.   $3,950
    C.   $13,200
    D.   $3,500
44        Chapter 2       Planning (Domain 2.0)



 12. The project scope statement consists of multiple components. All of the following are
     included within the project scope statement except for which one?
     A. Product scope description
     B.   Deliverables
     C.   Project requirements
     D.   Project exclusions

 13. Sally and Joe are two project managers working in the corporate offices of a popular
     fast-food franchise. They are both studying for their PMP certification and are having
     a discussion on the work breakdown structure (WBS). Sally is confused and asks Joe to
     describe what the WBS contains. What is Joe likely to respond with?
     A. The WBS includes a description of the project scope, major deliverables, assumptions,
        and constraints.
     B.   The WBS is a work package containing unique identifiers, which provide a structure
          for hierarchical summation of costs, schedule, and resource information.
     C.   The WBS is a document that provides detailed deliverable, activity, and scheduling
          information about each component within the project scope statement.
     D.   The WBS is a decomposition of the total scope of work to be carried out by
          the project team to accomplish the project objectives and create the required
          deliverables.

 14. If Activity A has an early start of 10, an early finish of 16, and a late start of 12, what is
     the total float of the activity?
     A. 0
     B.   6
     C.   2
     D.   4

 15. Which of the following is a valid tool or technique that aids the project manager in
     developing the risk management plan?
     A. Data analysis
     B.   Organizational process assets
     C.   Enterprise environmental factors
     D.   Data gathering

 16. Each of the following is a key element of the inputs to Define Scope that you should
     consider when starting this process, except for which one?
     A. Project management information system
     B.   Project charter
     C.   Requirements documentation
     D.   Historical information and product description
                                               Chapter 2      Planning (Domain 2.0)            45



17. A project manager facilitates a meeting with the project team to review an assessment of
    risks recently completed. During this meeting, they evaluate options for responding to the
    risks. It is decided that two risks will not receive any action and that they will deal with
    the consequences at the time of occurrence, should they occur. What type of risk response
    is this?
    A. Passive acceptance
    B.   Active acceptance
    C.   Mitigation
    D.   Avoidance

18. Your customer has requested a specific color for the product your project is producing.
    This is an example of which of the following?
    A. Requirement
    B.   Deliverable
    C.   Product description
    D.   Project description

19. A project manager is performing activities associated with the Plan Procurement
    Management process. Which tool or technique can he (she) use to gather information on
    specific seller capabilities?
    A. Market research
    B.   Advertising
    C.   Source selection analysis
    D.   Make-or-buy analysis

20. Balancing stakeholder interests and attaining customer satisfaction are important activities
    for project managers. One of the best things you can do to ensure customer satisfaction is
    to define and document which of the following?
    A. Estimates
    B.   Quality
    C.   Requirements
    D.   Objectives

21. A project manager presents a summary of project team roles and responsibilities, training
    needs, and recognition and rewards to the project sponsor for approval. In what activity
    are they engaged?
    A. Developing the stakeholder engagement plan
    B.   Identifying resource risk
    C.   Developing the resource management plan
    D.   Estimating project costs
46        Chapter 2      Planning (Domain 2.0)



 22. The project management plan might require changes and updates as the Planning
     processes proceed. These updates are decided upon and managed through which of the
     following?
     A. Approved change requests
     B.   Perform Integrated Change Control process
     C.   Control Communications process
     D.   Control Scope process

 23. Alyssa is a project manager tasked with managing an infrastructure project that will
     consolidate five data centers into one. She pulls together a core set of experts who have
     worked on similar projects to discuss how scope should be managed. What tool or
     technique is Alyssa using?
     A. Data analysis
     B.   Expert judgment
     C.   Alternatives analysis
     D.   Organizational process assets

 24. Alyssa is a project manager tasked with managing an infrastructure project that will
     consolidate five data centers into one. To date, she has completed and received sign-off
     of the project charter and identified her stakeholders. Currently, she is in the process of
     defining and documenting which processes she will use to manage the project. What
     output will this activity produce?
     A. The project charter
     B.   The stakeholder register
     C.   The project management plan
     D.   The scope management plan

 25. Marysil, an enterprise project manager for Cups on Fire, kicked off activities to develop
     the schedule. To date, she has generated the schedule management plan and led the team
     through a decomposition of work packages into activities. Now, she and the team are
     sequencing activities. She plans on displaying a visual using a network diagram during the
     next meeting. What network diagramming method is she most likely to use?
     A. Arrow diagramming method
     B.   Activity on arrow
     C.   Precedence diagramming method
     D.   Activity on line

 26. Using a triangular distribution formula, calculate the cost estimate based on the following
     three-point estimates: Optimistic = $2,500, Most Likely = $3,500, Pessimistic = $7,200.
     A. $4,400
     B.   $3,950
     C.   $13,200
     D.   $3,500
                                               Chapter 2      Planning (Domain 2.0)           47



27. Carina is a principal project manager of You've Got Dogs, a specialty company that
    creates custom dog apparel and toys. As part of her latest project, she interviews
    experienced subject-matter experts to better understand what risks exist within the
    project. Where will she document her findings?
    A. Risk register
    B.   Risk management plan
    C.   Risk report
    D.   Project documents

28. Some of the components of the project management plan define or include all of the
    following except for which one?
    A. The project management processes to be used by the project team
    B.   Configuration management plan
    C.   Methods for determining and maintaining the validity of the project baselines
    D.   The initial project organization

29. You are a project manager for Lightning Bolt Enterprises. Your new project involves the
    research and development of a new type of rechargeable battery. The project objectives, as
    documented in the project charter and used in creating the project scope statement, should
    include which of the following?
    A. A description of the business need that brought about this project
    B.   A brief summary of the product description, including measurable, quantifiable
         product requirements that will help measure project success
    C.   Quantifiable criteria, including elements such as cost, schedule, and quality measures
    D.   Quantifiable criteria derived from value engineering, value analysis, or function
         analysis

30. Analogous estimating is also known as what?
    A. Three-point estimating
    B.   Bottom-up estimating
    C.   Parametric estimating
    D.   Top-down estimating

31. All of the following statements are true regarding the Plan Scope Management process
    except for which one?
    A. It is the first process in the Project Scope Management Knowledge Area.
    B.   One of the purposes of this process is to create the scope management plan.
    C.   One of the purposes of this process is to develop the requirements management
         plan.
    D.   You will use facilitated workshops to help develop the outputs of this process.
48        Chapter 2      Planning (Domain 2.0)



 32. Alyssa is a project manager tasked with managing an infrastructure project that will
     consolidate five call centers into one. She pulls together a core set of experts who have
     worked on similar projects to discuss how scope should be managed. What project
     management process is she performing?
     A. Plan Scope Management
     B.   Collect Requirements
     C.   Define Scope
     D.   Validate Scope

 33. A project manager meets with the team to discuss how they will measure budget
     performance moving forward. What activity is the team engaged in?
     A. Taking corrective action
     B.   Evaluating performance
     C.   Developing the cost management plan
     D.   Developing the project budget

 34. You have decomposed the deliverables for your project as follows: Project Management,
     Design, Build, and Test. The Design deliverable is further decomposed to include these
     deliverables: product design document, blueprints, and prototype. Adequate cost and
     schedule estimates have been applied to all the deliverables. Which of the following has
     occurred?
     A. All the steps of decomposition have been performed.
     B.   Steps 1, 2, and 3 of decomposition have been performed for the Design deliverable.
     C.   Steps 1, 2, 3, and 4 of decomposition have been performed for all the deliverables.
     D.   Steps 1, 2, and 3 of decomposition have been performed for all the deliverables with
          the exception of the Design deliverable.

 35. All of the following statements are true except for which one?
     A. Perform Qualitative Risk Analysis is the third process within the Project Risk
        Management Knowledge Area.
     B.   Plan Risk Responses and Implement Risk Responses are part of the Planning process
          group.
     C.   The Project Risk Management Knowledge Area has a total of seven project
          management processes.
     D.   The risk management plan is a subsidiary plan of the project management plan.

 36. Which of the following best describes appraisal costs?
     A. Costs associated with satisfying customer requirements by creating a product without
        defects
     B.   Costs expended to examine the product or process and make certain the requirements
          are being met
     C.   Costs when things don't go according to plan
     D.   Costs that occur externally, when the customer determines that the requirements have
          not been met
                                                  Chapter 2      Planning (Domain 2.0)         49



37. Nicolas is the project manager of a project that has been described as revolutionizing
    the mobile fitness tracking industry. He recently finalized and published the scope. A
    key subject-matter expert on his team asks to see the list of acceptance criteria. What
    document will Nicolas reference to get this information?
    A. Project scope statement
    B.   Requirements documentation
    C.   Business case
    D.   Scope management plan

38. Which process is responsible for addressing the communication needs of the stakeholders
    by defining the types of information needed, the format for communicating the
    information, and how often it's distributed?
    A. Identify Stakeholders
    B.   Plan Stakeholder Engagement
    C.   Plan Communications Management
    D.   Manage Communications

39. Which of the following statements is not true regarding lateral thinking?
    A. It is a form of alternatives generation.
    B.   Lateral thinking is a tool and technique of the processes used when identifying
         risks.
    C.   Edward de Bono created this term and has done extensive research on the topic.
    D.   This is a way of reasoning and thinking about problems from perspectives other than
         the obvious.

40. Marysil, an enterprise project manager for Cups on Fire, is in the process of sequencing
    activities with her team to develop the project schedule. One team member noted that
    when the next generation prototype cup is cauterized, it will need to sit for a period
    of two days before it can be hand painted. How will Marysil reflect this within the
    schedule?
    A. By adding a two-day lead between the two activities
    B.   By adding a two-day lag between the two activities
    C.   By adding a two-day buffer between the two activities
    D.   By adding a two-day project buffer to the project

41. A project manager is working with a risk manager to prioritize individual project risks.
    What project management process is associated with this activity?
    A. Plan Risk Management
    B.   Identify Risks
    C.   Perform Qualitative Risk Analysis
    D.   Perform Quantitative Risk Analysis
50        Chapter 2          Planning (Domain 2.0)



 42. Alyssa is a project manager tasked with managing an infrastructure project that will
     consolidate five call centers into one. To date, she has completed and received sign-off
     of the project charter and identified her stakeholders. Currently, she is in the process of
     defining and documenting which processes she will use to manage the project. What
     process is she performing?
     A. Develop Project Charter
     B.   Develop Project Management Plan
     C.   Manage Project Knowledge
     D.   Monitor and Control Project Work

 43. All of the following statements are true about the Project Resource Management
     Knowledge Area except for which one?
     A. The Knowledge Area is responsible only for the identification, management, and
        monitoring of human resources.
     B.   The Knowledge Area has a total of six project management processes.
     C.   Estimating activity resources is an activity that occurs as part of this Knowledge
          Area.
     D.   The Knowledge Area has processes belonging to the Planning, Executing, and
          Monitoring and Controlling process groups.

 44. You work within a project management office, and the new PMO director has adjusted
     project assignments to accommodate a large strategic project that the company has
     undertaken. You sit down with the previous project manager of your new project to review
     stakeholder communication requirements, escalation processes, and the list of project-
     related meetings. What document will you use to get this information?
     A. Stakeholder engagement plan
     B.   Communications management plan
     C.   Resource management plan
     D.   Project management plan

 45. Which of the following statements best describes the product scope?
     A. The work performed to deliver a product, service, or results with the specified
        features and functions
     B.   The higher-level needs of the organization as a whole and the reasons why a project
          has been undertaken
     C.   The features and characteristics that describe the product, service, or result of the
          project
     D.   A description of the behaviors of the product, including actions and interactions that
          the product should execute

 46. What output of the Define Activities process describes the characteristics of activities?
     A. Activity attributes
     B.   Activity list
                                               Chapter 2      Planning (Domain 2.0)              51



    C.   Milestone list
    D.   Change requests

47. You are a project manager for Lightning Bolt Enterprises. Your new project involves the
    research and development of a new type of rechargeable battery. One of your stakeholders
    requests a change to the product scope description. They've filled out a change request
    form indicating that the change affects the project scope and that it's essential for a
    successful project. The change request is approved, and the project scope statement is
    updated to reflect this change. All of the following statements are true except for which
    one?
    A. The product scope description, which is also a component of the project charter, is an
       input to the Define Scope process.
    B.   Change requests are evaluated against the project scope statement, and if a change
         request is outside the bounds of the original project scope, the change should be
         denied.
    C.   Product analysis converts the product description and objectives into deliverables and
         requirements.
    D.   The project scope statement directs the project team's work and is the basis for future
         project decisions.

48. The difference between project deliverables and project requirements is best described in
    which of the following options?
    A. Deliverables are specific items that must be produced for the project or project phase
       to be considered complete. Each project phase has only one deliverable, which might
       have multiple requirements.
    B.   Requirements are measurable items that must be produced for the project or project
         phase to be considered complete. Each project phase might have multiple deliverables
         with multiple requirements.
    C.   Requirements are measurable items that must be produced for the project or project
         phase to be considered complete; deliverables are the specifications used to tell you
         what you are trying to produce.
    D.   Deliverables are specific items that must be produced for the project or project phase
         to be considered complete; requirements are the specifications of the deliverables used
         to tell you whether the deliverables were produced successfully.

49. You are the director of the project management office (PMO) for your organization. Terri,
    an employee from another department, has approached you about a new project that is
    being talked about in her department. Terri would like the opportunity to head up this
    project and wants to convince you of her knowledge of project management and that she
    can do this job. Terri's objective statement for the project says the following: "Convert
    all our distribution centers in the United States to Radio Frequency Identification (RFID)
    tags. This new technology will improve inventory management by giving us a real-time
    view of demand for the products we sell. It will also help reduce theft and reduce stock-
    outs. The electronic identification stored in the tags should be fixed. This new technology
52        Chapter 2        Planning (Domain 2.0)



     will require the installation of readers at each warehouse gate." All of the following
     statements are correct regarding Terri's objective statement except for which one?
     A. This statement describes an overview of the project, but it cannot be considered an
        objective statement because it's missing some important elements.
     B.   Objectives describe what it is the project is trying to produce or accomplish and
          requirements are specifications of the objective or deliverable.
     C.   This statement describes the objectives of the project adequately; however,
          requirements have been added into the statement.
     D.   Requirements have been mixed into the statement Terri wrote. One of the
          requirements in this statement is that "electronic identification stored in the tags
          should be fixed."

 50. All of the following are inputs to the Develop Project Management Plan process except for
     which one?
     A. Enterprise environmental factors
     B.   Organizational process assets
     C.   Outputs from other processes
     D.   Interpersonal and team skills

 51. Which of the following typically shows the departments, work units, or teams within an
     organization and their respective work packages?
     A. Work breakdown structure (WBS)
     B.   Resource breakdown structure (RBS)
     C.   Organization breakdown structure (OBS)
     D.   Risk breakdown structure (RBS)

 52. A project manager meets with the project team to estimate the duration of activities
     identified to date. The project sponsor recently guided the project manager to present
     her with a duration estimate for the project that contains a high confidence level. What
     estimating technique is the project manager likely to use, assuming that the necessary
     information is available?
     A. Three-point estimating
     B.   Bottom-up estimating
     C.   Parametric estimating
     D.   Top-down estimating

 53. Risk strategy, methodology, and risk-related roles and responsibilities are all elements of
     what?
     A. Risk register
     B.   Risk management plan
     C.   Risk report
     D.   Project documents
                                               Chapter 2      Planning (Domain 2.0)             53



54. All of the following are true regarding Estimate Activity Resources except for which one?
    A. The resource calendar tool and technique considers the time frames in which
       resources are available.
    B.   This process should be closely coordinated with the Estimate Costs process.
    C.   Alternatives analysis and bottom-up estimating are two of its tools and techniques.
    D.   Project management information system is a tool and technique of this process that
         can help plan, organize, and estimate resource needs.

55. You are the project manager for Changing Tides video games. Your project is a long-
    term project and will be completed in three phases over the next two years. You have
    gathered the inputs for the Estimate Activity Durations process and are ready to produce
    the activity duration estimates. Your sponsor would like a project estimate for all three
    phases by the end of the week. He understands that at this stage it will be a rough order of
    magnitude estimate and not entirely accurate. Which of the following tools and techniques
    will you use to produce this estimate?
    A. Parametric estimating
    B.   Expert judgment
    C.   Analogous estimating
    D.   Three-point estimating

56. Kaylee is a risk manager working in collaboration with Alyssa, a project manager. Both
    work for a top healthcare company. They are currently in the process of performing
    qualitative risk analysis. What input are they most likely to need to perform this process?
    A. Risk report
    B.   Risk register
    C.   Stakeholder register
    D.   Assumption log

57. A project manager has facilitated the decomposition of work packages into activities.
    She next carries the team through several exercises to identify predecessor and successor
    activities. The project manager is performing activities associated with which process?
    A. Plan Schedule Management
    B.   Define Activities
    C.   Sequence Activities
    D.   Estimate Activity Durations

58. Your project has a total of 35 stakeholders. How many lines of communication exist?
    A. 600
    B.   613
    C.   630
    D.   595
54        Chapter 2       Planning (Domain 2.0)



 59. The project sponsor asks the project manager to validate that the product scope has been
     met. What will the project manager use to measure the completion of the product scope?
     A. Product requirements
     B.   Project management plan
     C.   Requirements documentation
     D.   Project charter

 60. Which of the following represents a definitive range of estimates?
     A. -25 percent to +75 percent
     B.   -5 percent to +10 percent
     C.   -10 percent to +10 percent
     D.   -50 percent to +50 percent

 61. A small sample of your project's critical path is shown in the following table. Assuming
     each activity must finish before the next activity can begin, what is the late start and late
     finish date for activity 3?

      Activity                Duration                  Early Start         Early Finish
      1                       22                        5/1                 5/22
      2                       5                         5/23                5/28
      3                       7                         5/29                6/4
      4                       1                         6/5                 6/5

     A. Late start is 5/30, and late finish is 6/5.
     B.   Late start is 5/29, and late finish is 6/4.
     C.   Late start is 5/31, and late finish is 6/6.
     D.   Late start is 6/5, and late finish is 6/11.

 62. A project manager is performing quantitative risk analysis. What output is likely to be
     produced?
     A. An assessment of probability and impacts for each individual risk
     B.   A priority level for each individual project risk
     C.   An assessment of overall project risk exposure
     D.   A list of potential risk responses
                                                 Chapter 2       Planning (Domain 2.0)             55



63. A small sample of your project's critical path is shown in the following table. Assuming
    each activity must finish before the next activity can begin, which of the following options
    is not correct?

    Activity                 Duration                Early Start             Early Finish
    1                        22                      5/1                     5/22
    2                        5                       5/23                    5/28
    3                        7                       5/29                    6/4
    4                        1

    A. Activity 1-2-3-4 is the critical path.
    B.   Late start and late finish are the next set of calculations to perform.
    C.   To complete the chart and determine the remaining dates for activity 4, you have to
         perform a backward pass.
    D.   After early start, early finish, late start, and late finish dates are established, you can
         calculate the float for each activity.

64. A small sample of your project's PERT calculations is shown here. What is the total
    duration of the project?

                                                                                Likely Expected
    Activity                 Optimistic                Pessimistic              Value
    1                        10                        14                       12
    2                        20                        30                       23
    3                        3                         3                        3

    A. 33
    B.   38
    C.   37
    D.   47

65. You are looking over project team assignments and see that one of your resources is
    overallocated. You are concerned about the future availability of this resource and also
    notice the resource is assigned to more than one activity. To keep the project on schedule,
    which of the following techniques should you use?
    A. Reverse resource allocation scheduling
    B.   Resource leveling
    C.   Resource loading
    D.   Resource smoothing
56        Chapter 2      Planning (Domain 2.0)



 66. A small sample of your project's PERT calculations is shown here. Activity 2 is particularly
     important to the project, and your stakeholders are asking for a confidence level for this
     activity. You tell them there is a 95.44 percent chance of completing activity 2 within how
     many days?

                                                                           Likely Expected
     Activity                Optimistic             Pessimistic            Value
     1                       10                     14                     12
     2                       20                     30                     23
     3                       3                      3                      3

     A. Between 18 and 28 days
     B.   Between 21 and 25 days
     C.   Between 13 and 33 days
     D.   Between 23 and 28 days

 67. All of the following are true regarding resource calendars except for which one?
     A. Resource calendars show the resources' vacation time.
     B.   Resource calendars are an output of the Develop Schedule process.
     C.   Resource calendars are an output of the Acquire Resources process.
     D.   Resource calendars consider quantity, capability, and availability of equipment and
          material resources.

 68. A project manager managing a small project has a total of 12 active stakeholders. How
     many lines of communication exist?
     A. 66
     B.   72
     C.   12
     D.   24

 69. Carina is a principal project manager of You've Got Dogs, a specialty company that
     creates custom dog apparel and toys. As part of her latest project, she interviews
     experienced subject-matter experts to better understand what risks exist within the
     project. What project management process is she carrying out?
     A. Plan Risk Management
     B.   Identify Risks
                                                Chapter 2      Planning (Domain 2.0)              57



    C.   Perform Qualitative Risk Analysis
    D.   Perform Quantitative Risk Analysis

70. This type of dependency has a tendency to create arbitrary total float values that will limit
    your options when scheduling activities. What type of dependency is this?
    A. Mandatory
    B.   Hard
    C.   Discretionary
    D.   External

71. Which quality theorist is responsible for the theory that promotes doing it right the first
    time?
    A. Philip Crosby
    B.   Joseph Juran
    C.   W. Edwards Deming
    D.   Walter Shewhart

72. The project manager is facilitating an exercise with the team by asking questions about
    the product and forming answers to describe the use, characteristics, and other relevant
    aspects of what will be delivered. In what activity is the team involved?
    A. Data analysis
    B.   Product analysis
    C.   Alternatives analysis
    D.   Facilitation

73. The project team recently participated in a working session to determine the costs
    associated with individual activities. To produce a more accurate estimate, they broke each
    activity down further into smaller chunks. What process is the team engaged in?
    A. Plan Cost Management
    B.   Estimate Costs
    C.   Determine Budget
    D.   Control Costs
58        Chapter 2      Planning (Domain 2.0)



 74. You are a project manager for Time Will Tell, an international watch manufacturer. Your
     project entails developing a watch with global positioning satellite (GPS) capabilities.
     Kit is a junior staff member with two years of experience in GPS technology. Carrie is
     a senior staff member with five years of experience working with GPS technology. You
     are developing the activity duration estimates for the project activities. You are trying to
     determine an estimate for a particular activity that involves GPS skills and knowledge.
     Carrie has worked on activities similar to this in the past. She tells you the activity will
     likely take 45 days. All of the following statements are true regarding the information in this
     question except which one?
     A. Carrie used an analogous estimating technique to come up with the 45-day estimate
        for this activity.
     B.   The activities are similar in fact, not just appearance, and Carrie has the needed
          expertise to provide this estimate, so you can rely on the estimate being reasonably
          accurate.
     C.   Carrie used a technique that is a form of expert judgment to estimate this activity.
     D.   The technique Carrie used can also be used to estimate project duration because of
          the amount of information available about the details of the project.

 75. Kaylee is a risk manager working in collaboration with Alyssa, a project manager, and
     both work for a top healthcare company. They are currently in the process of performing
     risk analysis. Of the 20 risks identified, 5 are deemed to be low priority. Where will these
     risks be documented?
     A. A watch list
     B.   The risk report
     C.   The project management plan
     D.   The risk management plan

 76. Using the following three-point estimates, calculate the expected value using the triangular
     distribution formula: Optimistic = 25, Pessimistic = 50, Most Likely = 35.
     A. 25
     B.   36
     C.   35
     D.   37

 77. Accuracy levels, units of measure, control thresholds, and performance measurement rules
     are all elements of what project management document?
     A. Scope management plan
     B.   Schedule management plan
     C.   Project management plan
     D.   Requirements management plan
                                              Chapter 2       Planning (Domain 2.0)            59



78. Reasons to Lyv is the top client of a large marketing firm. Trudy is the president of
    Reasons to Lyv and has decided to launch a product that leverages new GPS tracking
    technology. She sits down with Roy, the project manager on the project, to discuss which
    stakeholders are resistant, unaware, neutral, supportive, or leading within the project.
    What tool or technique are they using?
    A. Data representation
    B.   Data analysis
    C.   Data gathering
    D.   Expert judgment

79. A project manager is managing a project working to produce a fitness tracking device.
    He has just finished getting the project authorized and analyzing stakeholder needs and
    expectations. What activity is he likely to perform next?
    A. Generate a project charter
    B.   Put together the project management plan
    C.   Collect the project and product requirements
    D.   Develop a stakeholder engagement strategy

80. A project manager learns of a recent issue that has been identified while running cable
    underground. The issue is deemed to be minor, so the project manager emails the project
    sponsor to ensure she is kept informed of all activities, as requested. What type of
    communication method did the project manager use?
    A. Interactive communication
    B.   Push communication
    C.   Pull communication
    D.   Multidirectional communication

81. The project team recently participated in a working session to determine the costs
    associated with individual activities. To produce a more accurate estimate, they broke
    each activity down further into smaller chunks. What estimating technique is the team
    using?
    A. Analogous estimating
    B.   Parametric estimating
    C.   Bottom-up estimating
    D.   Three-point estimating

82. What do functional requirements describe?
    A. The environmental conditions or qualities required for the product to be effective
    B.   The needs of a stakeholder or stakeholder group
    C.   The higher-level needs of the organization as a whole
    D.   The behaviors of the product
60        Chapter 2       Planning (Domain 2.0)



 83. This tool and technique of the Develop Schedule process is used in conjunction with some of
     its other tools and techniques, including critical path method, to produce the project schedule.
     A. Applying leads and lags
     B.   Schedule network analysis
     C.   Resource leveling
     D.   Scheduling tool

 84. All of the following are true regarding three-point estimates except for which one?
     A. This estimating technique uses most likely, optimistic, and pessimistic estimates to
        determine an overall estimate.
     B.   This estimating technique requires reliance on experienced team members to provide
          these estimates.
     C.   This estimating technique calculates a weighted average estimate that is more accurate
          than one estimate.
     D.   This estimating technique is a tool and technique of the Estimate Activity Duration
          process.

 85. Your project sponsor has reviewed the initial project schedule you created for the project.
     She is not happy with the project end date because it doesn't match the promise date she
     gave the customer. You decide to use some compression techniques first. Which of the
     following statements should you keep in mind (and know to be true) regarding duration
     compression?
     A. Crashing is a compression technique that typically produces a viable alternative.
     B.   Fast-tracking is a compression technique that typically results in increased costs.
     C.   Schedule compression shortens the project schedule but doesn't change the project scope.
     D.   Crashing is a compression technique that typically results in increased risk.

 86. Your project estimates have come in as follows: Most Likely is 100 days, Pessimistic is 250
     days, Optimistic is 75 days. What is the expected value of this estimate?
     A. 120.83 days
     B.   141.66 days
     C.   108.33 days
     D.   195.33 days

 87. Kaylee is a risk manager working in collaboration with Alyssa, a project manager, and
     both work for a top healthcare company. They are currently in the process of performing
     risk analysis. To determine the most likely date of project completion, based on known
     risks, they run a simulation using a risk management tool that will run through thousands
     of possible scenarios. What tool are they using?
     A. Monte Carlo analysis
     B.   Decision-tree analysis
     C.   Sensitivity analysis
     D.   Influence diagrams
                                               Chapter 2      Planning (Domain 2.0)            61



88. Using the following three-point estimates, calculate the expected value using the beta
    distribution formula: Optimistic = 25, Pessimistic = 50, Most Likely = 35.
    A. 25
    B.   36
    C.   35
    D.   37

89. Reasons to Lyv is the top customer of a large marketing firm. Trudy is the president of
    Reasons to Lyv and has decided to launch a product that leverages new GPS tracking
    technology. She sits down with Roy, the project manager on the project, to discuss which
    stakeholders are resistant, unaware, neutral, supportive, or leading within the project.
    What activity are they performing?
    A. Identifying stakeholders
    B.   Planning stakeholder engagement
    C.   Managing stakeholder engagement
    D.   Monitoring stakeholder engagement

90. Ronaldo has just joined the company as a project manager and is taking over an active
    project that is in the process of developing the schedule. The previous project manager
    did a good job of maintaining project management documents up to date. Which project
    management document can Ronaldo reference that will outline the methodology and tools
    the team is using to perform schedule network analysis?
    A. Cost management plan
    B.   Activity list
    C.   Schedule management plan
    D.   Project schedule network diagram

91. A project manager learns of a recent issue that has been identified while running cable
    underground. The issue is deemed to be minor, so the project manager emails the project
    sponsor to ensure they are kept informed of all activities, as requested. The project sponsor
    promptly calls the project manager to get additional information on the issue. What
    communication method did the sponsor use?
    A. Interactive communication
    B.   Push communication
    C.   Pull communication
    D.   Email communication

92. Which of the following is a valid tool and technique that the project manager can use to
    help ensure the effectiveness of the requirements management plan?
    A. Alternatives analysis
    B.   Meetings
    C.   Organizational process assets
    D.   Requirements traceability matrix
62        Chapter 2      Planning (Domain 2.0)



 93. These two tools and techniques of the Plan Communications Management process
     consider the number of communication channels and the methods for transferring
     information among stakeholders, respectively.
     A. Information-gathering systems and communications methods
     B.   Communications requirements analysis and communication technology
     C.   Communications skills and information distribution methods
     D.   Communications methods and additional communications distribution methods

 94. Which of the following components of Plan Communications Management inputs are of
     particular importance to this process?
     A. All of the elements described in the enterprise environmental factors input
     B.   Lessons learned and historical information (parts of the organizational process assets
          input)
     C.   All of the elements described in the organizational process assets input
     D.   Communications requirements, change control procedures, and performance
          measurement criteria (parts of the organizational process assets input)

 95. You are working on a communications management plan for your project. You examine
     elements such as the company and department organization charts, stakeholder
     relationships, the different departments involved on the project, the number of people
     associated with the project and where they work, and the government reporting needs
     you have because of the nature of this project. Which of the following does this question
     describe?
     A. Communications models
     B.   Communications technology
     C.   Communication methods
     D.   Communications requirements analysis

 96. You are working on the communications management plan for your project and
     have considered the timing and need for updated information by you and your
     four stakeholders. Your organization has modern, up-to-date technology that your
     stakeholders and staff have used before, so you anticipate that supplying the information
     and updates to your stakeholders and team members will be a breeze. Which of the
     following is true?
     A. There are 10 channels of communication, which should be considered when
        examining communications requirements analysis.
     B.   There are 5 channels of communication, which should be considered when examining
          communications requirements.
     C.   There are 12 channels of communication, which should be considered when
          examining communications technology.
     D.   There are 20 channels of communication, which should be considered when
          examining communications technology.
                                                 Chapter 2      Planning (Domain 2.0)             63



 97. Roshoud is the VP of customer operations for Galactic Kidz and project sponsor of the
     latest project, called Project G. He sits down with Sally, the project manager, to discuss
     the current budget estimate. Roshoud expresses his concerns to Sally over the budget being
     far greater than originally anticipated and asks her to course-correct. What produces the
     greatest expense on most projects?
     A. Vendors
     B.   Resources
     C.   Materials
     D.   Travel

 98. This term is used for both costs and schedules to establish what you'll measure against
     later in the Executing and Monitoring and Controlling processes.
     A. Variance
     B.   Expected value
     C.   Baseline
     D.   Estimates

 99. Which of the following best describes individual project risk?
     A. An uncertain event or condition that, if it occurs, has a negative effect on one or more
        project objectives.
     B.   An uncertain event or condition that, if it occurs, has a positive or negative effect on
          one or more project objectives.
     C.   The effect of uncertainty on the project as a whole, arising from all sources of
          uncertainty.
     D.   The effect of uncertainty on a project objective, arising from all sources of uncertainty.

100. Alyssa is a project manager tasked with managing an infrastructure project that will
     consolidate five data centers into one. She is currently facilitating the estimating process
     to calculate the duration of the project's activities. Alyssa knows that she has reliable
     information and is therefore planning on using an estimating technique that will yield a
     highly accurate estimate with minimal effort expended. What estimating technique is she
     planning on using?
     A. Three-point estimating
     B.   Bottom-up estimating
     C.   Parametric estimating
     D.   Top-down estimating

101. You are in the Planning stage of the project and have just begun to generate the cost
     baseline. In what activity are you engaged as a project manager?
     A. Performing the Plan Cost Management process
     B.   Performing the Estimate Costs process
     C.   Performing the Determine Budget process
     D.   Performing the Control Costs process
64        Chapter 2      Planning (Domain 2.0)



102. You are a contract project manager and have entered into the activities definition phase
     of your project. You take the team through a decomposition activity to break down work
     packages into activities. Before concluding this phase, what else are you and the team
     likely to capture?
     A. The activity list
     B.   The milestone list
     C.   The network diagram
     D.   The list of predecessors and successors

103. Kaylee is a senior project manager for a fitness company that is developing a new franchise
     model. She has just led the team through various workshops to capture requirements.
     What activity is she likely to perform next?
     A. Publish the requirements management plan
     B.   Define the scope of the project
     C.   Develop the work breakdown structure
     D.   Measure the completion of the requirements

104. You've derived cost estimates and allocated them to the activities of your project. You
     know that these estimates will be used to measure cost variances and performance
     throughout the remaining life of the project. The cost baseline has been established and
     becomes the expected cost of the project. Which process did you perform to arrive at the
     cost baseline?
     A. Estimate Costs
     B.   Cost Control
     C.   Determine Budget
     D.   Develop Costs

105. Which of the following is not true regarding the Determine Budget process?
     A. Cost estimates and basis of estimates are both outputs of the Estimate Costs process
        and are both inputs to this process.
     B.   Project costs should include all costs associated with the project, including direct and
          indirect costs.
     C.   Funding limit reconciliation is a tool and technique of this process that involves
          reconciling the amount of funds to be spent with the amount of funds budgeted for
          the project.
     D.   Warranty period costs are considered part of the project life cycle and should be
          included in the cost budget.

106. Which of the following best describes the purpose of the Plan Stakeholder Engagement
     process?
     A. To identify project stakeholders regularly and analyze and document relevant
        information regarding their interests, involvement, interdependencies, influence, and
        potential impact on project success
     B.   To communicate and work with stakeholders to meet their needs and expectations,
          address issues, and foster appropriate stakeholder involvement
                                                Chapter 2      Planning (Domain 2.0)            65



     C.   To monitor project stakeholder relationships and tailor strategies for engaging
          stakeholders through modification of engagement strategies and plans
     D.   To develop approaches to involve project stakeholders based on their needs,
          expectations, interests, and potential impacts on the project

107. You are creating the cost management plan. You have talked with your project sponsor
     and CFO and will document that you are rounding to the nearest thousand and will
     be using weeks to estimate resources. What two elements of the plan does this describe
     respectively?
     A. Control thresholds and units of measure
     B.   Units of measure and control thresholds
     C.   Rules of performance and level of accuracy
     D.   Level of accuracy and units of measure

108. All of the following statements are true regarding the Develop Project Management Plan
     process except for which one?
     A. The process has a single output, which is the project management plan.
     B.   The output outlines what processes will be carried out to manage the project, along
          with the project's requirements.
     C.   The purpose of the process is to describe how the project will be executed, monitored,
          controlled, and closed.
     D.   The scope management plan, scope baseline, and stakeholder engagement plan are all
          components of the project management plan.

109. Which of the following serves as the basis for estimating costs?
     A. Scope baseline
     B.   WBS
     C.   Resource management plan
     D.   Cost baseline

110. Which of the following tools and techniques of the Estimate Costs process should you
     use when you want to improve your estimates and account for risk and estimation
     uncertainty?
     A. Analogous estimating
     B.   Three-point estimating
     C.   Bottom-up estimating
     D.   Expert judgment

111. Which quality theorist is known as the grandfather of Total Quality Management (TQM)?
     A. Philip Crosby
     B.   Joseph Juran
     C.   W. Edwards Deming
     D.   Walter Shewhart
66        Chapter 2      Planning (Domain 2.0)



112. Which of the following best describes overall project risk?
     A. An uncertain event or condition that, if it occurs, has a negative effect on one or more
        project objectives.
     B.   An uncertain event or condition that, if it occurs, has a positive or negative effect on
          one or more project objectives.
     C.   The effect of uncertainty on the project as a whole, arising from all sources of uncertainty.
     D.   The effect of uncertainty on a project objective, arising from all sources of uncertainty.

113. You are in the process of facilitating a working session with the project team to
     decompose the project deliverables into smaller chunks of work. What process are you
     carrying out?
     A. Plan Scope Management
     B.   Collect Requirements
     C.   Define Scope
     D.   Create WBS

114. You are in the Planning stage of the project and have just kicked off activities associated
     with the Determine Budget process. In addition to the cost baseline, what is a likely output
     of this activity?
     A. Cost estimates
     B.   Project funding requirements
     C.   Basis of estimates
     D.   Cost management plan

115. You have derived your activity cost estimates, including human resources, materials,
     equipment, information technology needs, and contingency reserve amounts. You have
     documented constraints and assumptions for each of your key activities, you have
     described how the estimates were derived, and you have included a range of possible
     results. You will eventually request sign-off for the total project budget. Which of the
     following have you prepared?
     A. The basis of estimates
     B.   The project documents updates
     C.   An organizational process asset update
     D.   The funding limit reconciliation

116. You have derived your activity cost estimates, including human resources, materials,
     equipment, information technology needs, and contingency reserve amounts. You have
     documented constraints and assumptions for each of your key activities, you have
     described how the estimates were derived, and you have included a range of possible
     results. You will eventually request sign-off for the total project budget. During this
     process, you have found the risk register needs to be updated and know that the cost
     estimates and the overall project budget will likely change as the project progresses.
     Which of the following does this describe?
                                                 Chapter 2      Planning (Domain 2.0)              67



     A. The basis of estimates and project documents updates, which are outputs of the
        Estimate Costs process
     B.   The control thresholds and basis of estimates, which are outputs of the Determine
          Budget process
     C.   The basis of estimates and project documents updates, which are outputs of the
          Determine Budget process
     D.   The control thresholds and basis of estimates, which are outputs of the Estimate Cost
          process

117. Which of the following is not true regarding the cost baseline?
     A. The performance measurement baseline is another term for the cost baseline when
        you're using parametric estimating techniques to determine costs.
     B.   The cost baseline is the total expected cost for the project when using earned value
          management techniques.
     C.   The cost baseline is an output of the Determine Budget process along with project
          funding requirements and project documents updates.
     D.   The cost baseline is calculated in part by using an aggregate of the cost estimates of
          the project activities.

118. You have completed your cost baseline and are now determining funding requirements.
     Which of the following is true?
     A. Funding requirements are derived from the activity costs.
     B.   Management reserves are the difference between the funding requirements and the
          cost baseline.
     C.   The management reserve is released in a lump sum at the beginning of the project.
     D.   Funding requirements are an output of the Estimate Costs process.

119. You are a senior project manager for a company that produces mobile phone applications.
     In your latest project, you have teamed up with another project manager, who will manage
     a subset of the project. She tells you that the work packages have been decomposed and
     milestones captured for her deliverables. Together, you review her list of milestones, the
     first of which reads "Finish GUI: 30 Days." What is wrong with this scenario?
     A. Two project managers cannot be associated with one project.
     B.   A milestone cannot contain the word GUI.
     C.   Work packages should not be decomposed.
     D.   The project manager is unclear as to the definition of a milestone.

120. You are developing the cost baseline and the project budget. You know that all of the
     following are true regarding these two elements except for which one?
     A. The project budget includes management reserves.
     B.   Work package estimates and contingency reserves are included in the cost baseline
          and project budget.
     C.   The cost baseline includes the project budget.
     D.   Activity cost estimates and contingency reserves are included in the cost baseline and
          project budget.
68        Chapter 2         Planning (Domain 2.0)



121. Which process is concerned with effectively engaging stakeholders, understanding their
     needs and interests, understanding the good and bad things they bring to the project, and
     understanding how the project will impact them?
     A. Control Stakeholder Engagement
     B.   Plan Stakeholder Engagement
     C.   Identify Stakeholders
     D.   Manage Stakeholder Engagement

122. You work for a company that writes billing software programs for the communication
     industry. Your customer is located in a country that limits the number of foreigners
     allowed into the country. You identify this risk in your risk management plan. The critical
     point during the project is installation and setup. You might do which of the following,
     given these circumstances?
     A. Develop a shared response strategy
     B.   Develop a cause-and-effect diagram that identifies the risk and shows the cost effect
          of each choice on the objectives of the project
     C.   Use sensitivity analysis to determine the causal influences of these risks and the time
          ordering of the events
     D.   Develop a mitigation plan for installation and setup

123. All of the following are components that make up the scope baseline except for which
     one?
     A. Project scope statement
     B.   Activities list
     C.   WBS
     D.   WBS Dictionary

124. You are the project manager for the Heart of Texas casual clothing company. Your project
     involves installing a new human resources system. You've identified the risks associated
     with this project and are ready for the next step. What is the next step?
     A. You should evaluate the risks and assign probabilities and impacts using Qualitative
        and/or Quantitative Risk Analysis.
     B.   You should use the Delphi technique to confirm the risks you've detailed and identify
          others you may have missed.
     C.   You should evaluate the risks and assign probabilities and impacts using both Perform
          Qualitative Risk Analysis, which comes first, and then Perform Quantitative Risk
          Analysis.
     D.   You should define the steps to take to respond to the risks and detail them in the risk
          response plan.
                                                 Chapter 2       Planning (Domain 2.0)            69



125. You work for a company that writes billing software programs for the communication
     industry. Your customer is located in a country that limits the number of foreigners
     allowed into the country. You identify this risk in your risk management plan. The critical
     point during the project is installation and setup. You have assessed the risks and are
     using the Perform Qualitative Risk Analysis process. Which of the following tools and
     techniques will you use to determine the potential effect on the project objectives (such as
     time, cost, scope, or quality) and determine the likelihood of the risk occurring?
     A. Risk categorization
     B.   Risk probability and impact assessment
     C.   Risk data quality assessment
     D.   Risk urgency assessment

126. All of the following are true regarding the probability and impact matrix except for which
     one?
     A. It prioritizes risks according to their potential for meeting the project's objectives.
     B.   It's defined in the risk management plan, which is an output of the Plan Risk
          Management process.
     C.   It's used as a tool and technique in the Perform Qualitative Risk Analysis process.
     D.   It's used as an input to the Perform Quantitative Risk Analysis process.

127. Using the values within the following table, identify the critical path.

      Activity Name             Successor                 Duration
      A                         B, C                      5
      B                         D                         2
      C                         D, E                      4
      D                         F                         4
      E                         F                         6
     F                          None                      6

     A. A-B-D-F
     B.   A-C-D-F
     C.   A-C-E-F
     D.   A-B-E-F
70        Chapter 2      Planning (Domain 2.0)



128. Using the values within the following table, calculate the early finish of activity D.

      Activity Name             Successor                 Duration
      A                         B, C                      5
      B                         D                         2
      C                         D, E                      4
      D                         F                         4
      E                         F                         6
      F                         None                      6

     A. 10
     B.   12
     C.   13
     D.   15

129. Using the values within the following table, calculate the late start of activity C.

      Activity Name             Successor                 Duration
      A                         B, C                      5
      B                         D                         2
      C                         D, E                      4
      D                         F                         4
      E                         F                         6
      F                         None                      6

     A. 6
     B.   9
     C.   4
     D.   8

130. Using the values within the following table, calculate the total float of activity E.

      Activity Name             Successor                 Duration
      A                         B, C                      5
      B                         D                         2
                                                 Chapter 2       Planning (Domain 2.0)           71




     Activity Name               Successor                Duration
     C                           D, E                     4
     D                           F                        4
     E                           F                        6
     F                           None                     6

     A. 0
     B.   2
     C.   6
     D.   1

131. Cost plus incentive fee, cost plus award fee, cost plus percentage of cost, and cost plus
     fixed fee are all other names for what contract type?
     A. Cost-reimbursable contract
     B.   Time and materials contract
     C.   Fixed-price contract
     D.   Cost plus contract

132. Interviewing, brainstorming, and checklists are three types of data gathering techniques
     found in which process?
     A. Perform Qualitative Risk Analysis
     B.   Monitor Risks
     C.   Identify Risks
     D.   Perform Quantitative Risk Analysis

133. All of the following statements describe the Determine Budget process except for which
     one?
     A. The Determine Budget process utilizes several estimating techniques.
     B.   The purpose of the Determine Budget process is to establish an authorized cost
          baseline.
     C.   The cost baseline is an output of the Determine Budget process.
     D.   Management reserves are part of the project funding requirements but not the cost
          baseline.

134. Why is assessing risk probability in the Perform Qualitative Risk Analysis process
     difficult?
     A. Because it relies on historical data
     B.   Because the values are cardinal
     C.   Because the values are ordinal
     D.   Because it relies on expert judgment
72        Chapter 2        Planning (Domain 2.0)



135. Mandatory dependency is also known by what other name?
     A. Preferred logic
     B.   Hard logic
     C.   Soft logic
     D.   External dependency

136. Your project has kicked off, and you are beginning a series of overview sessions with key
     users to determine requirements for a new enterprise resource software implementation.
     What process group are the activities you are performing in?
     A. Initiating
     B.   Planning
     C.   Executing
     D.   Monitoring and Controlling

137. The lowest level of the work breakdown structure (WBS) is referred to as which of the
     following?
     A. WBS dictionary
     B.   Work package
     C.   Planning package
     D.   Control account

138. Which contract type can incorporate incentives for meeting or exceeding certain contract
     deliverables above a firm price for the goods or services rendered?
     A. Cost-reimbursable contract
     B.   Time and materials contract
     C.   Fixed-price contract
     D.   Cost plus contract

139. You are working on the risk management plan for your current project and need to
     document how the risk activities will be recorded for the benefit of future projects. Which
     part of the risk management plan addresses these issues?
     A. Lessons learned
     B.   Thresholds
     C.   Tracking
     D.   Reporting format

140. A project manager is performing activities associated with the Plan Procurement
     Management process. He is attempting to determine, along with the relevant subject-
     matter experts, whether it makes more sense to develop internally or purchase a
     deliverable. What tool or technique can he use to produce a successful outcome?
     A. Market research
     B.   Advertising
     C.   Source selection analysis
     D.   Make-or-buy analysis
                                                  Chapter 2       Planning (Domain 2.0)             73



141. All of the following are true regarding EMV analysis except for which one?
      A. EMV is a tool and technique within the Perform Quantitative Risk Analysis tools and
         techniques.
      B.   EMV is often used in conjunction with decision-tree analysis.
      C.   EMV examines risk from the perspective of the project as a whole.
      D.   EMV is calculated by multiplying the probability of the occurrence by the value of
           each possible outcome and adding the results together.

142. You've gathered cost estimates for the activities of your current project. Most of the
     activities can be completed with existing staff resources. The summary cost estimate for
     existing resources is $535,000. You will also need to hire contractors to perform some of
     the activities that require specialized skills. You've received a bid from a local vendor for
     $137,000 for these services. All of the following statements are true except which one?
      A. You've determined a quantitative estimate of the cost to the organization to perform
         the activities of the project.
      B.   The cost of the vendor services to your organization is considered pricing (from the
           vendor's perspective), which is a business decision on their part.
      C.   The procurement SOW can be prepared by either the buyer or seller, and it should be
           as accurate as possible, as you will use this SOW in the contract award.
      D.   You should use purchase price as the sole criterion for choosing among vendors when
           you have multiple qualified sellers from which to choose.

143. Alyssa is a project manager tasked with managing an infrastructure project that will
     consolidate five data centers into one. She is currently facilitating the estimating process to
     calculate the duration of the project's activities. When she gets to the "run cable" activity,
     one team member tells her that in a past similar project, they ran a similar length of cable
     in 13 hours; another team member tells her that they can run 110 meters of cable per hour.
     The team will need to run a total of 1,320 meters of cable. Using the analogous estimating
     technique, how many hours will it take the team to run the cable?
      A. 9
      B.   13
      C.   10
      D.   12

144. A project manager meets with a key set of experts within her project team. They express
     concerns over recent cost estimates produced, insisting that they have not sufficiently
     considered alternatives. It is still early in the project life cycle. Which of the following is a
     valid tool or technique that can aid the project manager in addressing the team's concerns?
      A. Analogous estimating
      B.   Expert judgment
      C.   Decision-making
      D.   Data analysis
74        Chapter 2      Planning (Domain 2.0)



145. What action can a project manager take if the selected risk response strategy turns out not
     to be fully effective?
     A. Develop and implement a fallback plan
     B.   Document and respond to a secondary risk
     C.   Actively accept the risk
     D.   Update the risk register with the outcome

146. Like the WBS, all of the following present project information in a hierarchical fashion
     except for which one?
     A. OBS
     B.   BOM
     C.   RAM
     D.   RBS

147. You are the project manager for an outdoor concert event scheduled for one year from
     today. You're working on the procurement documents for the computer software program
     that will control the lighting and screen projections during the concert. You've decided to
     contract with a professional services company that specializes in writing custom software
     programs. You want to minimize the risk to the organization and want a well-defined set
     of deliverables for a set price. You have agreed to pay the vendor a bonus if they complete
     the program at least 30 days earlier than scheduled, so you'll opt for which contract type?
     A. FPIF
     B.   CPFF
     C.   FFP
     D.   CPIF

148. A project manager spends the afternoon updating the attributes associated with
     requirements captured. In what document will the project manager record this
     information?
     A. Requirements documentation
     B.   Requirements log
     C.   Requirements management plan
     D.   Requirements traceability matrix

149. You are the project manager for the Heart of Texas casual clothing company. It's
     introducing a new line of clothing called Black Sheep Ranch Wear. You will outsource the
     production of this clothing line to a vendor. Your legal department has recommended you
     use a contract that reimburses the seller's allowable costs and includes a fixed fee upon
     completion of the contract. Which of the following contract types will you use?
     A. CPIF
     B.   CPFF
     C.   CPF
     D.   FPIF
                                                Chapter 2      Planning (Domain 2.0)           75



150. A RAM or RACI chart is considered which of the following?
     A. A type of OBS chart
     B.   A hierarchical chart
     C.   A type of RBS chart
     D.   A matrix-based chart

151. Emma is a project manager working on a project that will require a specially engineered
     machine. Several manufacturers can make the machine to the specifications Emma needs.
     She will use purchase price as the sole criterion for choosing from among the vendors.
     Which of the following is true regarding this question?
     A. Emma must use purchase price alone as the sole criterion for evaluation because
        multiple vendors are involved.
     B.   Emma will review the procurement documents and teaming agreements as some of
          the inputs to this process.
     C.   Emma will include delivery and setup charges as part of the purchase price criterion.
     D.   Emma will use the advertising tool and technique of this process to let vendors know
          about this opportunity.

152. You have been hired as a contract project manager for Grapevine Vineyards. Grapevine
     wants you to head up a project to design a new visitor center, tasting room, and gift shop.
     They also want to double the number of fermenting tanks and increase the size of the
     warehouse (which requires extensive temperature and environmental controls.) Grapevine
     management estimates this project will take three years. When you submit this project for
     bid, which of the following contract types will contractors likely want to use in order to
     protect themselves from cost increases and inflation?
     A. T&M
     B.   CPIF
     C.   FP-EPA
     D.   CPAF

153. You are the project manager for BB Tops, a nationwide toy store chain. Your new project
     involves creating a prototype display at several stores across the country. You are using a
     RACI chart to display individuals and activities. Which of the following is true regarding
     this type of chart?
     A. A RACI chart is part of the organization charts and position descriptions tool and
        technique of the Plan Resource Management process.
     B.   A RACI chart is a type of matrix-based chart that is a tool and technique of the Plan
          Resource Management process.
     C.   A RACI chart is part of the organization chart and position descriptions and is a type
          of hierarchical chart that is a tool and technique of the Plan Resource Management
          process.
     D.   A RACI chart is a type of RAM chart that is a tool and technique of the Plan
          Resource Management process.
76        Chapter 2       Planning (Domain 2.0)



154. The project team recently participated in a working session to determine the costs
     associated with individual activities. To produce a more accurate estimate, they broke each
     activity down further into smaller chunks. What will this activity yield?
     A. Cost estimates
     B.   Basis of estimates
     C.   Cost baseline
     D.   Project budget

155. A project manager facilitates a meeting to review an assessment of risks recently completed
     with the project team. During this meeting, they evaluate options for responding to the
     risks. It is decided that three risks will not receive any action other than an increase in
     the contingency reserve fund, for use should the risks occur. What type of risk response is
     this?
     A. Passive acceptance
     B.   Active acceptance
     C.   Mitigation
     D.   Avoidance

156. You have been hired as a contract project manager for Grapevine Vineyards. You are in
     the Plan Procurement Management process. Grapevine wants you to head up a project
     to design a new visitor center, tasting room, and gift shop. They also want to double
     the number of fermenting tanks and increase the size of the warehouse (which requires
     extensive temperature and environmental controls). Grapevine would like to have the bar
     in the tasting room constructed out of specialty marble that is available from only two
     places in the world. Grapevine management estimates this project will take three years.
     You are concerned about the availability of the specialty marble and know all of the
     following are true except which one?
     A. The project schedule can influence this process.
     B.   The Determine Budget process can be influenced by this process.
     C.   The make-or-buy analysis can be influenced by this process.
     D.   Your organization's business cycle might have an impact on this process.

157. You are the project manager for Xylophone Phonics, which produces children's software
     programs that teach basic reading and math skills. You are performing the Plan Quality
     Management process and are considering the trade-offs between cost and quality. You
     know that it is cheaper and more efficient to prevent defects in the first place than to
     spend time and money fixing them later. Which of the following does this describe?
     A. Cost-benefit analysis
     B.   Make-or-buy decisions
     C.   Cost of quality
     D.   Nonconformance costs
                                                 Chapter 2       Planning (Domain 2.0)            77



158. Which of the following best describes the purpose of the project management plan?
     A. The project management plan describes how the project will be executed, monitored,
        controlled, and closed.
     B.   The project management plan describes the requirements that must be met in order to
          produce the project and product scope.
     C.   The project management plan documents the project success criteria, the approval
          requirements, and who will sign off on the project.
     D.   The project management plan documents the business need and the cost-benefit
          analysis that justifies the project.

159. Alyssa is a project manager tasked with managing an infrastructure project that will
     consolidate five data centers into one. She is currently facilitating the estimating process to
     calculate the duration of the project's activities. When she gets to the "run cable" activity,
     one team member tells her that in a past similar project, they ran a similar length of cable
     in 13 hours; another team member tells her that they can run 110 meters of cable per
     hour. The team will need to run a total of 1,320 meters of cable. Using the parametric
     estimating technique, how many hours will it take the team to run the cable?
     A. 9
     B.   13
     C.   10
     D.   12

160. Collect Requirements and Create WBS are processes belonging to what project
     management Knowledge Area?
     A. Project Integration Management
     B.   Plan Schedule Management
     C.   Project Scope Management
     D.   Project Stakeholder Management
Chapter   Executing

 3
          (Domain 3.0)

          THE PROJECT MANAGEMENT
          PROFESSIONAL (PMP)(R) EXAM CONTENT
          FROM THE EXECUTING THE PROJECT
          PERFORMANCE DOMAIN COVERED
          IN THIS CHAPTER INCLUDES THE
          FOLLOWING:

           Obtain and manage project resources, including out-
           sourced deliverables, by following the procurement plan
           in order to ensure successful project execution.

           Maximize team performance through leading, mentoring,
           training, and motivating team members.

           Execute the tasks as defined in the project plan in order to
           achieve the project deliverables within budget and
           schedule.

           Implement approved changes according to the change
           management plan in order to meet project requirements.

           Implement the quality management plan using the appro-
           priate tools and techniques in order to ensure that work is
           being performed according to required quality standards.

           Implement approved actions and follow the risk man-
           agement plan and risk register in order to minimize the
           impact of negative risk events on the project.


                         The process names, inputs, tools and techniques,
                         outputs, and descriptions of the project manage-
                         ment process groups and related materials and
                         figures in this chapter are based on content from A
                         Guide to the Project Management Body of Knowl-
                         edge (PMBOK (R) Guide), Sixth Edition (PMI(R), 2017).
80           Chapter 3         Executing (Domain 3.0)



     1. The project manager facilitates the implementation of approved changes by following the
        documented change control process. Which of the following is a valid tool or technique to
        assist the project manager in performing this activity?
        A. Change log
        B.   Project management information system
        C.   Work performance data
        D.   Approved change requests

     2. All of the following are tools and techniques of the Develop Team process except for which one?
        A. Training
        B.   Emotional intelligence
        C.   Colocation
        D.   Negotiation

     3. These processes are responsible for distributing information about the project to the
        stakeholders and satisfying the needs of the stakeholders by managing communications
        with them, respectively.
        A. Manage Stakeholder Engagement and Manage Communications
        B.   Manage Stakeholder Engagement and Information Distribution
        C.   Manage Communications and Manage Stakeholder Engagement
        D.   Information Distribution and Manage Stakeholder Engagement

     4. Recognition and rewards are important parts of team interaction. They are both formal
        ways of recognizing and promoting desirable behavior. Which of the following statements
        is not true regarding reward and recognition?
        A. They are an input of the Develop Team process.
        B.   They should be proportional to the achievement.
        C.   Rewards can kill motivation if used improperly.
        D.   Rewards should be linked to performance.

     5. During this contract life-cycle phase, the vendors are asked to compete for the contract
        and respond to the RFP. What contract life-cycle phase is this?
        A. Requirement
        B.   Solicitation
        C.   Requisition
        D.   Award

     6. Each of the following is an example of an information management system except for
        which one?
        A. Email
        B.   Electronic files
        C.   Voicemail
        D.   Websites
                                              Chapter 3      Executing (Domain 3.0)                81



 7. You are working on a project that involves some top-secret manufacturing techniques your
    organization has invented and patented. One of the team members on the project has an
    extraordinary amount of knowledge about this technique. She is sought after by others
    in the organization for advice and will need to help the team with the current project. It's
    important that nothing involving this technique is discussed outside of this project. What
    type of power does this describe?
    A. Referent
    B.   Situational
    C.   Expert
    D.   Punishment

 8. All of the following are true regarding the organizational process assets updates output of
    the Manage Communications process except for which one?
    A. Stakeholder notifications are part of this output and go hand in hand with one of
       the areas covered in the Role Delineation Study in the PMI Code of Ethics and
       Professional Conduct.
    B.   Project reports are part of this output and include status reports, among others, and
         according to the PMI Code of Ethics and Professional Conduct, the status of projects
         should always be truthful.
    C.   Lessons learned documentation is part of this output, and lessons learned meetings should
         be conducted at the end of project phases and at the end of the project at a minimum.
    D.   Feedback from stakeholders is part of this output and can improve performance on
         future projects, but it is too late to incorporate the feedback on the current project.

 9. The organizational process assets updates output of the Manage Communications process
    includes all of the following except which one?
    A. PMIS and project communications
    B.   Stakeholder notifications and project reports
    C.   Project presentations and project records
    D.   Lessons learned and feedback from stakeholders

10. A project manager has just facilitated the project change control process, which yielded 10
    approved change requests. What process is he likely to perform next?
    A. Direct and Manage Project Work
    B.   Perform Integrated Change Control
    C.   Manage Project Knowledge
    D.   Develop Project Management Plan

11. Raw observations and measurements identified while carrying out activities associated
    with the project work describe what?
    A. Work performance information
    B.   Work performance data
    C.   Work performance reports
    D.   Work performance analysis
82        Chapter 3      Executing (Domain 3.0)



 12. A project manager is carrying out activities associated with the Manage Communications
     process. What result will these activities produce?
     A. Ensuring that the information needs of the project and its stakeholders are met
     B.   Developing an appropriate approach and plan for project communication activities
     C.   Communicating and working with stakeholders to meet their needs and expectations
     D.   Ensuring timely and appropriate collection, distribution, and the ultimate disposition
          of project information

 13. Your manager requests a meeting with you. When you meet, she asks you about the third
     paragraph of the recent status report. She doesn't understand what it means and believes
     that it may cast a bad light on her and the team. She asks you to explain, listens to your
     response, restates what you said, and then offers suggestions regarding how to phrase this
     type of information on future status reports. Which style of leadership and type of power
     does your manager practice?
     A. Transactional and punishment
     B.   Transformational and legitimate
     C.   Democratic and referent
     D.   Laissez-faire and reward

 14. You have received proposals in response to your recent RFP. The following types
     of information were used by your evaluation team to rate the vendors: availability,
     experience, and training. Experience was given the most weight, 5. Availability was
     assigned a weight of 3, and training was assigned a weight of 2. Vendor A scored the
     following: availability as 4, experience as 2, and training as 2. Vendor B scored the
     following: availability as 3, experience as 4, and training as 4. Which vendor won the bid,
     and what was the final score?
     A. Vendor B, final score 21
     B.   Vendor B, final score 37
     C.   Vendor A, final score 21
     D.   Vendor B, final score 43

 15. You are in the process of attaining and hiring resources for the project. Some of the
     resources can be found within the organization, but three of the resources you've
     identified must be hired on contract. You need to consider previous experience, personal
     interests, personal characteristics, availability, and the competencies and proficiency of the
     contractors as well as the internal staff. Which of the following statements best describes
     the situation?
     A. The situation in this question refers to the project staff assignment, which is an output
        of Plan Resource Management.
     B.   The situation in this question refers to organizational process assets, which are an
          input of Plan Resource Management.
                                              Chapter 3      Executing (Domain 3.0)               83



    C.   The situation in this question refers to the project staff assignments, which are an
         output of Acquire Resources.
    D.   The situation in this question refers to the enterprise environmental factors input to
         the Acquire Resources process.

16. Who is attributed with the theory that says people are motivated by the need for power,
    achievement, and affiliation?
    A. David McClelland
    B.   Victor Vroom
    C.   Frederick Herzberg
    D.   Douglas McGregor

17. When working in the Conduct Procurements process, you might consider asking the
    vendor to supply you with an ink sample for a project on which you're working. The ink
    must have special qualities (they were outlined in the RFQ), and before making a selection,
    you want to test the ink in the printers that will be used at project deployment. All of the
    following statements are true except for which one?
    A. This is an example of a proposal evaluation technique, which is a tool and technique
       of this process.
    B.   This is an example of source selection criteria, which are inputs of this process.
    C.   This is an example of a proposal evaluation technique, which is an output of this
         process.
    D.   Source selection criteria might also include financial capacity and technical capability.

18. You are working with your stakeholders during the Executing processes. You are dealing
    with some issues involving the project objectives and are working to maintain consensus
    among the five stakeholders participating in this project. You have used both influencing
    and negotiating skills and have finally come to consensus on the issue at hand. Which of
    the following options best describes the contents of this question?
    A. You are using the interpersonal and team skills tool and technique of the Manage
       Stakeholder Engagement process.
    B.   You are using the management skills tool and technique of the Control Stakeholder
         Engagement process.
    C.   You are using the communication method tool and technique of the Plan Stakeholder
         Management process.
    D.   You are using the meetings tool and technique of the Plan Stakeholder Management
         process.
84        Chapter 3      Executing (Domain 3.0)



 19. A project manager is addressing risks or potential concerns related to stakeholder
     management and is anticipating future issues that may be raised by stakeholders. What
     process is she performing?
     A. Monitor Communications
     B.   Manage Communications
     C.   Manage Stakeholder Engagement
     D.   Monitor Stakeholder Engagement

 20. All of the following statements are true regarding the Develop Team process except for
     which one?
     A. The outputs of the Develop Team process are team performance assessments, change
        requests, project management plan updates, organizational process assets updates,
        and enterprise environmental factors updates.
     B.   This process is concerned with developing and training teams, not individuals.
     C.   Team building can result in effective, functioning, coordinated performance among
          team members.
     D.   Colocation is a technique used to help the team perform better.

 21. All of the following statements are true regarding the Manage Project Knowledge process
     except for which one?
     A. It addresses both explicit and tacit knowledge.
     B.   It generates the lessons learned register.
     C.   It is performed at the end of the Executing process group.
     D.   It often results in updates to the project management plan.

 22. A project manager meets with the team to increase cultural awareness by conducting
     training on cultural norms relating to countries they will be closely engaged with. What
     activity is the project manager engaged in?
     A. Planning stakeholder engagement
     B.   Monitoring stakeholder engagement
     C.   Managing stakeholder engagement
     D.   Managing communications

 23. You are a senior project manager working at a manufacturing plant that produces
     components used by the aviation industry. You are in the process of implementing
     approved changes. What process group do these process activities belong to?
     A. Initiating process group
     B.   Planning process group
     C.   Executing process group
     D.   Monitoring and Controlling process group
                                             Chapter 3       Executing (Domain 3.0)           85



24. Colocation is also known as what?
    A. Tight matrix
    B.   Virtual teams
    C.   Dedicated teams
    D.   Effective teams

25. Which of the following best describes the directing conflict resolution technique?
    A. Pushing one's viewpoint at the expense of others
    B.   Incorporating multiple viewpoints and insights
    C.   Retreating from a potential conflict solution
    D.   Searching for solutions that bring some degree of satisfaction

26. You are using a set of defined minimum requirements and information about the sellers
    (including past performance, contract compliance, and quality ratings) to make a selection
    among vendor proposals. What two tools and techniques does this represent?
    A. Screening systems and seller rating systems, respectively
    B.   Screening systems and internet search, respectively
    C.   Seller rating systems and screening systems, respectively
    D.   Internet search and screening systems, respectively

27. Which of the following options explains one of the purposes of the Develop Team process?
    A. To create an open, encouraging environment in which team members can contribute
    B.   To create a disciplined environment in which team members can contribute
    C.   To create a colocated environment in which team members can contribute
    D.   To create a colocated, disciplined environment in which team members can contribute

28. You've noticed that your CIO shows all the signs of being a good leader. All of the
    following statements are true regarding leaders expect which one?
    A. Leaders use referent power.
    B.   Leaders impart vision.
    C.   Leaders are concerned with strategic plans.
    D.   Leaders are concerned with satisfying stakeholder needs.

29. According to the PMBOK(R) Guide, this is required as part of the selected sellers output of
    the Conduct Procurements process.
    A. Purchase order
    B.   Memorandum of understanding
    C.   Procurement contract award
    D.   Negotiated draft contract
86        Chapter 3       Executing (Domain 3.0)



 30. According to the PMBOK(R) Guide, this output of the Manage Stakeholder Engagement
     process is used to promote communication with stakeholders.
     A. Project communications
     B.   Issue log
     C.   Project management plan updates
     D.   Change requests

 31. Acquire Resources, Manage Communications, and Conduct Procurements are processes
     that belong to which of the following project management process groups?
     A. Initiating
     B.   Planning
     C.   Executing
     D.   Monitoring and Controlling

 32. Which of the following project management documents records challenges, problems,
     realized risks, and opportunities?
     A. Issue log
     B.   Lessons learned register
     C.   Risk register
     D.   Project documents

 33. Nicolas is the project manager of a project that has been described as revolutionizing
     the mobile fitness tracking industry. He recently used his negotiation skills to achieve
     the support and agreement of two functional leads involved in his project. As part of
     his approach, he references the plan that outlines strategies and actions documented
     to manage specific stakeholders. What document did Nicolas reference to get this
     information?
     A. Communications management plan
     B.   Stakeholder engagement plan
     C.   Resource management plan
     D.   Procurement management plan

 34. You are in the process of facilitating a change control meeting. You review a change
     request that would double the scope of the project but would not yield a major increase
     in the project's resulting benefits. You know that the submitter of the change request has
     a tendency to bloat a project's scope without fully thinking through the impact, but as
     a result of their position in the company, their changes tend to be approved. You invite
     a financial analyst to the meeting to walk the team through the negative impact of the
     change request, and the team votes to reject the change. What type of power did you use?
     A. Legitimate
     B.   Expert
                                               Chapter 3      Executing (Domain 3.0)             87



    C.   Referent
    D.   Punishment

35. Your project is dependent on a precise manufacturing process. You have hired trained
    auditors to evaluate the process and identify ineffective activities. The auditors bring a few
    ineffective activities to your attention, and as a result, you take a corrective action. All of
    the following are true regarding this situation except for which one?
    A. This is a quality improvement that came about as a result of the quality audit.
    B.   Quality improvements are implemented by submitting change requests.
    C.   Quality improvements are implemented by taking corrective actions.
    D.   Quality audits have the same purpose as the Control Quality process.

36. One of your team members, Daniela, talks with you privately about a confrontation she
    just had with Noelle, another team member working on the same project. It seems they
    can't agree on a fundamental business process needed for the project. They both think
    they are correct in their view, and each has set up a meeting with you, independently, to
    convince you of her position. Which of the following statements is true?
    A. This describes the storming stage of team development.
    B.   This describes the performing stage of team development.
    C.   This describes the norming stage of team development.
    D.   This describes the forming stage of team development.

37. What output of the Manage Stakeholder Engagement process includes updates made to the
    issue log?
    A. Project documents updates
    B.   Project management plan updates
    C.   Issue log updates
    D.   Change requests

38. This output of the Direct and Manage Project Work process is in part concerned with
    documenting adherence to quality standards, number of change requests, schedule activity
    completion estimates, and resource consumption and utilization.
    A. Work performance data
    B.   Status reports
    C.   Project document updates
    D.   Lessons learned
88        Chapter 3      Executing (Domain 3.0)



 39. You are in the process of hiring resources for a project. Some of the resources can be found
     within the organization, but three of the resources you've identified must be hired from
     outside the organization. You need to consider previous experience, personal interests,
     personal characteristics, availability, and competencies and proficiency of the contractors
     as well as the internal staff. You have a friend who is looking for a job. He isn't qualified
     for the position, but you know him well enough to know he will come up to speed quickly.
     A couple of training classes should do the trick. What process is this question describing,
     and which area of the PMI Code of Ethics and Professional Conduct does this question
     refer to?
     A. Develop Team and Respect
     B.   Manage Team and Honesty
     C.   Plan Resource Management and Fairness
     D.   Acquire Resources and Responsibility

 40. All of the following statements are true regarding power types, except for which one?
     A. Punishment power is also known as coercive power.
     B.   Expert power comes from an individual's knowledge about the subject.
     C.   Referent power is also known as formal power.
     D.   Punishment, expert, legitimate, and referent are all power types.

 41. All of the following are outputs of the Manage Project Knowledge process except for
     which one?
     A. Deliverables
     B.   Lessons learned register
     C.   Project management plan updates
     D.   Organizational process asset updates

 42. You have devised some proposal evaluation criteria based on past performance, contract
     compliance, and quality ratings to select a seller. Your organization has used two of the
     three vendors that bid on this project on previous projects, so you are comfortable using
     whichever one is selected. Which of the following is one of the most important criteria in
     evaluating the responses to your proposal?
     A. Predefined performance criteria or a set of defined minimum requirements
     B.   The financial records of the potential vendor to determine their fiscal ability to
          perform the services
     C.   Determining whether the vendor has a clear understanding of what you're asking
          them to do
     D.   Information about the seller such as past performance, delivery, contract compliance,
          and quality ratings
                                             Chapter 3      Executing (Domain 3.0)             89



43. All of the following are true about the Executing process group except for which one?
    A. There are 10 project management processes that belong to the Executing process
       group.
    B.   The Executing process group contains the processes performed to complete the work
         defined in the plan.
    C.   The Executing processes often produce updates to the project management plan and
         project documents.
    D.   The Executing process group contains processes that track, review, and regulate the
         progress and performance of the project.

44. Which of the following describes who is responsible for the quality assurance of the
    project?
    A. Project manager
    B.   Project manager and project team members
    C.   Stakeholders
    D.   Project team members, project manager, and stakeholders

45. Corrective actions are taken as a result of which of the following?
    A. Comparing and monitoring project performance against the baseline
    B.   When deviations are discovered while coordinating and integrating the various
         elements of the project
    C.   To reduce the probability of negative consequences
    D.   To correct product defects discovered during the quality processes

46. Victor Vroom developed a theory that recognizes the belief that a positive outcome drives
    motivation. You are looking for a new position as a program manager. You don't have
    the experience for this level of responsibility, but you are rationalizing that if you have
    enough motivation and can fudge a bit of experience on the application, you're showing
    initiative and hopefully, the outcome will be in your favor. What theory is this question
    describing and what area within the Responsibility domain of the PMI Code of Ethics and
    Professional Conduct does this question refer to?
    A. Hygiene Theory and Professional Demeanor
    B.   Achievement Theory and Ensuring Integrity
    C.   Expectancy Theory and Accepting Assignments
    D.   Self-actualization level of the Hierarchy of Needs and Conflict of Interest

47. Which of the following power types relies on the influencer's position?
    A. Legitimate
    B.   Expert
    C.   Referent
    D.   Punishment
90        Chapter 3       Executing (Domain 3.0)



 48. You are a project manager for a network cabling project for your organization. Your
     project team consists of six full-time employees and three contractors. They have all
     worked together on a previous project a year ago. You are new to the team. Which of the
     following is true?
     A. According to Tuckman-Jensen, they will start with the storming stage of team
        development.
     B.   According to Hersey and Blanchard, they will start with the forming stage of team
          development.
     C.   According to Tuckman-Jensen, they will start with the forming stage of team
          development.
     D.   According to Hersey and Blanchard, they will start with the performing stage of team
          development.

 49. Contract phases are closely related to the Project Procurement Management Knowledge
     Area processes. All of the following are true except for which one?
     A. The requirement stage, which establishes the project and contract needs, is related to
        the Plan Procurement Management process.
     B.   The requisition stage, where responses to procurement documents are reviewed, is
          related to the Conduct Procurements process.
     C.   The award stage, where the contract is awarded, is related to the Conduct
          Procurements process.
     D.   Two of the outputs of the Plan Procurement Management process are inputs to the
          Conduct Procurements process.

 50. You are in the process of translating the quality management plan into executable quality
     activities that account for existing quality policies. What can you use to help you organize
     information in a series of steps that lead to a defect?
     A. Flowcharts
     B.   Histograms
     C.   Matrix diagrams
     D.   Affinity diagrams

 51. You are a new project manager and have always been self-motivated. You are destined
     to achieve good things and desire to attain the coveted PMP designation. Even after
     attaining the designation, you will strive to apply professional knowledge to your future
     projects and adhere to the PMI Code of Ethics and Professional Conduct. Which theory
     is described in this question, and what area of the PMI role delineation study does this
     question refer to?
     A. Hygiene Theory and ensure personal integrity and professionalism
     B.   Contingency Theory and contributing to the project management knowledge base
     C.   Expectancy Theory and enhance professional competence
     D.   Leadership Theory and responsibility
                                              Chapter 3      Executing (Domain 3.0)              91



52. Carina is a principal project manager of You've Got Dogs, a specialty company that
    creates custom dog apparel and toys. As part of her latest project, she struggles to rein
    in the team, who seem to be at each other's throats. She knows everyone has good
    intentions, but they are not yet open and trusting with each other. What phase of the team
    development model is the team currently in?
    A. Norming
    B.   Performing
    C.   Forming
    D.   Storming

53. You are a project manager working within a project management office (PMO). You facilitate
    a session to identify the cause of a defect by whiteboarding all of the process steps with the
    team. One team member expresses frustration during the meeting, stating that this is not his
    job and that the quality team should be having this conversation alone. Managing quality, as
    well as participating in quality assurance activities, is whose reponsibility?
    A. Quality team
    B.   Project manager
    C.   Project team
    D.   Everyone

54. You are in the Acquire Resources process and are attaining and assigning resources to the
    project. You have both internal and external resources. You will be hiring your external
    resources using a work order against a contract you have with a local staffing agency. All
    of the following are true except for which one?
    A. The project manager is responsible for assuring the resources are skilled and
       available for the project and for documenting their reporting responsibilities. This is
       accomplished in this process and in the Plan Resource Management process.
    B.   The project manager might not have the ability to hire or select all of the project team
         members.
    C.   The team members coming from the consulting company are accounted for in the
         Plan Procurement Management process and Plan Resource Management process, not
         this process.
    D.   Checking for availability and considering personal interests and characteristics are an
         important part of this process.

55. You are a project manager with a new company. You started less than 30 days ago. Your
    boss has told you it's urgent that resources are obtained and assigned to the project as soon
    as possible. This is your top priority. In addition, the quality assurance team needs to be
    assembled. All of the following are true regarding this situation except for which one?
    A. The project manager will have the greatest impact on quality during this process.
    B.   You should follow the Acquire Project Team processes to obtain the new resources.
    C.   Quality assurance is generally provided by a third party.
    D.   Project team members, the project manager, and stakeholders are responsible for the
         quality assurance of the project.
92        Chapter 3      Executing (Domain 3.0)



 56. You are a project manager for Dakota Software Consulting Services. You're working
     with a major retailer that offers its products through mail-order catalogs. It's interested
     in knowing customer characteristics, the amounts of first-time orders, and similar
     information. At one of your first project meetings, you explain to the team that quality
     is the number-one priority with this project and you will immediately deal with any
     project results (and those who caused them) that are not in keeping with this goal. The
     last software company that worked with this retailer was terminated because the quality
     of the end product was unacceptable. You tell the team there will be rewards for those
     who meet the quality requirements of this project. You also tell them the guidelines for
     escalating issues with the retailer and instruct them there are to be no deviations from this
     process. You want to know about anything that has the potential to become an issue. You
     conclude the meeting and return to your office to write the next status report. Which of
     the following is true regarding this question?
     A. This behavior is most like the democratic leadership style.
     B.   This behavior is most like the transformational leadership style.
     C.   This behavior is most like the transactional leadership style.
     D.   This behavior is most like the situational leadership style.

 57. You hold a position that is primarily concerned with satisfying stakeholder needs as well
     as issues such as plans, controls, budgets, policies, procedures, and team motivation. You
     have signed a nondisclosure agreement, promising not to give away trade secrets, and you
     have signed a noncompete agreement with your current employer that says you will not go
     to work for a competitor any sooner than 18 months after the date of your termination.
     Your staff members have signed similar agreements, but their noncompete agreement is for
     12 months rather than 18. You have discovered, through a friend of a friend, that one of
     your staff members is interviewing at a competing company, and if the position is offered
     and accepted, it would violate the noncompete agreement your staff member signed.
     Which of the following describes the type of position you hold and the domain within the
     PMI Code of Ethics and Professional Conduct that pertains to this situation?
     A. Manager and Responsibility
     B.   Leader and Respect
     C.   Manager and Honesty
     D.   Leader and Fairness

 58. Which of the following shows quality management issues escalated by the team, as well as
     recommendations for process, project, and product improvements?
     A. Quality management plan
     B.   Quality control measurements
     C.   Test and evaluation documents
     D.   Quality reports
                                              Chapter 3        Executing (Domain 3.0)          93



59. You are a project manager with a new company. You started less than 30 days ago. Your
    boss has told you it's urgent that resources are attained and assigned to the project as soon
    as possible. This is your top priority. You have both internal and external resources. You
    have two internal positions that will be full-time employees, but the positions are vacant,
    so you need to recruit for and fill these positions. You happen to have a good friend you've
    known for several years who also attends your local PMI chapter. He is well qualified
    and looking for a new position. You call him up and hire him on the spot. You will be
    hiring your external resources using a work order against a contract you have with a local
    staffing agency. Which of the following is true regarding this situation?
    A. You have ignored the organizational process assets input to the Acquire Resources
       process.
    B.   Since the project is not yet underway, the new resource you hired will be considered a
         pre-assignment, which is a tool and technique of the Acquire Resources process.
    C.   The personal interests and characteristics of the person you hired were not
         considered.
    D.   The resource management plan, an input to the Acquire Resources process, will need
         updates.

60. All of the following are tools and techniques of the Manage Stakeholder Engagement
    process except for which one?
    A. Decision-making
    B.   Expert judgment
    C.   Ground rules
    D.   Meetings

61. Silvana is a junior project manager who was recently hired to work on projects supporting
    the networking team. Her first project is plagued with issues, mostly caused by team
    member conflicts. Her sponsor attempts to reassure Silvana. What fact is she likely to
    share with Silvana?
    A. Conflict often occurs within a technical environment.
    B.   Conflict is inevitable in a project environment.
    C.   Conflict is always good.
    D.   Conflict is never a reflection of the project manager.

62. You are a project manager for Fly Me to Miami travel services. You need to obtain some
    services for your project on contract and have published an RFP. You are in the Conduct
    Procurements process and know that all of the following statements are true except for
    which one?
    A. This process is used for obtaining goods or services, whether internal or external to
       the organization.
    B.   Several techniques can be used to evaluate proposals.
    C.   Vendors may be required to be on a qualified seller list to participate in the bid.
    D.   Bidder conferences are used during this process to answer questions regarding the RFP.
94        Chapter 3      Executing (Domain 3.0)



 63. Kaylee is a risk manager working in collaboration with Alyssa, a project manager, and
     both work for a top healthcare company. During a tense moment, they have a heated
     debate on how a risk should be treated. They decide to get the sponsor's viewpoint and
     reach consensus after further discussion. What conflict resolution technique did they use?
     A. Avoid
     B.   Collaborate
     C.   Direct
     D.   Compromise

 64. Your virtual project team consists of 12 people in the same building you're located in plus
     4 people from the West Coast office, 2 people from the Kansas City office, and 6 people
     from the London office. Your office works different hours from all the other offices.
     Additionally, not all of the resources in your building are available at the same times
     during the day. Three of those 12 team members work swing shift hours. Which of the
     following is not true?
     A. The teams do not have the same project goals because of the differences in location.
        Your role is to make certain team members understand the goals and how you will be
        measuring their performance.
     B.   Team members should understand the expectations you have for them on the project,
          and you should make certain they understand the decision-making processes.
     C.   Your role is to communicate to all team members and make certain they understand
          the protocols for communicating with you and each other.
     D.   Your role is to make certain that team members are given credit for their performance
          and actions on the project.

 65. Roshoud is serving as the project sponsor for a high visibility project within the
     Galactic Kidz corporation. During a weekly executive status meeting, he expresses concern
     regarding quality assurance and requests an update. Quality assurance is most concerned
     with what?
     A. Using processes effectively and assuring stakeholders that the end result will meet
        their needs
     B.   Identifying quality requirements and/or standards of the project and its deliverables
     C.   Documenting how the project will demonstrate compliance with quality requirements
          and/or standards
     D.   Monitoring and recording the results of executing the quality management activities
          to assess project performance

 66. Which of the following best describes the performing stage of the team development
     model, developed by Tuckman?
     A. The phase where team members meet and learn about the project and formalize their
        roles and responsibilities
     B.   The phase where team members begin to work together and adjust their work habits
          and behaviors to support the team
                                              Chapter 3      Executing (Domain 3.0)               95



    C.   The phase where the team is functioning as a well-organized unit and work through
         their issues smoothly
    D.   The phase where the team members begin to address the project work and are not yet
         collaborative or open with each other

67. You are a project manager working for a nonprofit organization. Your team consists of
    full-time employees from the same nonprofit organization, and all of you are motivated by
    providing a service to others in need. You have worked with these team members before
    and know they each have outstanding performance records. Your project concerns setting
    up a receiving and distribution center for new and gently used laptops to be distributed to
    schools in Latvia. At a recent team meeting, you reiterated the expectations for this project
    with all of your team members. You eagerly listened to their ideas and concerns and
    assured them you would support them in meeting the goals of the project no matter what it
    takes. Which theory do you subscribe to?
    A. Theory X
    B.   Hygiene Theory
    C.   Contingency Theory
    D.   Theory Y

68. Your project is well into the Executing phase. You are working with inputs such as quality
    metrics, work performance information, and quality control measurements, and you are
    working with tools and techniques such as quality audits and process analysis. You know
    that the most important thing to remember about this process is which of the following?
    A. This process involves performing systematic quality activities, including quality
       audits, to determine which processes should be used to achieve the project
       requirements.
    B.   The quality management processes you use on the project help ensure that the project
         satisfies the quality standards outlined in the project management plan.
    C.   This quality process is concerned with achieving the project requirements and
         assuring they are performed efficiently and effectively.
    D.   This process uses tools and techniques such as cost-benefit analysis, cost of quality,
         and additional quality tools to determine inefficiencies in the process.

69. Your virtual project team consists of 12 people in the same building you're located in plus
    4 people from the West Coast office, 2 people from the Kansas City office, and 6 people
    from the London office. Your office works different hours from all the other offices.
    Additionally, not all of the resources in your building are available at the same times
    during the day. Three of those 12 team members work swing shift hours. Which of the
    following should you use to capture the availability information for these resources and
    potential future resources, as well as their capabilities and skills?
    A. Activity calendar
    B.   Team roster
    C.   Project calendar
    D.   Composite resource calendar
96        Chapter 3      Executing (Domain 3.0)



 70. You have accepted a position in a new company and have spent the first 30 days observing
     your team. Your findings, unfortunately, are not encouraging. The team exhibits a lack of
     motivation, poor communication among team members, a lack of respect for you and your
     position, and project work results that are less than satisfactory. For a fleeting moment,
     you think about leaving but realize that's not in keeping with the PMI Code of Ethics and
     Professional Conduct. You know all of the following are true, given the circumstances,
     except for which one?
     A. You know that quitting would not be in keeping with the Responsibility, Respect,
        Fairness, or Honesty domains of the PMI Code of Ethics and Professional Conduct.
     B.   You will use interpersonal skills, training, and team-building activities, among others,
          to attempt to improve this dysfunctional team.
     C.   You are in the Manage Team process and realize that since you are new to the team,
          the stages of team development will start over again at the forming stage.
     D.   You will use ground rules, recognition and rewards, and personnel assessment tools,
          among others, to attempt to improve this dysfunctional team.

 71. Kaylee is a risk manager working for a top healthcare company. She was recently brought
     in to support a project that has been plagued with a multitude of issues. The project
     sponsor informs her that the issues were a result of not implementing documented risk
     response plans. Kaylee clarifies to the sponsor that this is not the root cause of the issues
     at hand but is instead caused by the most common problem with project risk management.
     What problem is Kaylee referring to?
     A. Risks are not fully analyzed, and therefore, the risk responses are not effective.
     B.   A full-time risk manager is often not allocated to a project, causing poor risk
          management to occur.
     C.   Project teams spend effort in identifying, analyzing, and developing responses for
          risks but do not manage them.
     D.   Risk triggers are not clearly documented in the risk register, causing the response
          plans to be ineffective.

 72. All of the following statements about the Direct and Manage Project Work process are
     true, except for which one?
     A. The key benefit of the process is that it provides overall management of the project work.
     B.   Deliverables and work performance data are outputs of the process.
     C.   This process is responsible for generating approval of change requests.
     D.   Approved change requests and the change log are two key inputs to the process.

 73. Which of the following processes uses evaluation criteria to evaluate proposals, rank the
     responses, and award the contract?
     A. Conduct Procurements, of which proposal evaluation is a tool and technique
     B.   Plan Procurement Management, of which proposal evaluation is a tool and technique
     C.   Contract Administration, of which evaluation criteria are inputs
     D.   Plan Contracting, of which evaluation criteria are outputs
                                             Chapter 3      Executing (Domain 3.0)               97



74. A project manager is in the process of holding a kick-off meeting to signal that execution
    of the project work is about to begin. She reviews the project baseline, communication
    cadence, and guidelines with the team, and she treats them to a pizza party to increase
    morale. Which of the following documents serves as the project baseline?
    A. Project management plan
    B.   Approved project schedule
    C.   Work plan
    D.   Approved project budget

75. The project management plan serves as the project baseline. During which of the following
    process groups should you continually compare and monitor project performance against
    the baseline so that corrective actions can be taken and implemented as soon as necessary?
    A. Planning
    B.   Monitoring and Controlling
    C.   Executing
    D.   Initiating

76. Marysil is an enterprise project manager for Cups on Fire. To date, she has identified risks,
    analyzed them, and developed risk responses for her project. What activity is she likely to
    carry out next?
    A. Plan Risk Responses process
    B.   Perform Quantitative Risk Analysis process
    C.   Implement Risk Responses process
    D.   Plan Risk Management process

77. All of the following are outputs of the Acquire Resources process or are documents that
    should be updated as a result of this process except for which one?
    A. Project team assignments
    B.   Team performance assessments
    C.   Cost baseline
    D.   Resource management plan

78. Your project is well into the Executing phase. You are working with inputs such as quality
    metrics, risk report, and quality control measurements, and tools and techniques such as
    quality audits and process analysis. The other tool and technique of this process includes
    all of the following tools except which one?
    A. Cost of quality
    B.   Alternatives analysis
    C.   Document analysis
    D.   Root cause analysis
98        Chapter 3      Executing (Domain 3.0)



 79. You are a project manager and are in the stage of the project where you are juggling a lot
     of activities at the same time. You are negotiating for resources, negotiating procurements,
     and monitoring risks and risk triggers. An approved change request has come your way
     and must be processed back through this process. This approved change will expand your
     project scope. You daydream of escaping the day-to-day work life and for a brief moment
     wonder whether you could contract this additional work through your spouse's company
     and take the money and run. But then the daydream bubble bursts and it's back to reality.
     What process does this describe, and what area within the PMI Code of Ethics and
     Professional Conduct pertains to this situation?
     A. Conduct Procurements and ensuring integrity
     B.   Direct and Manage Project Work and accepting assignments
     C.   Conduct Procurements and intellectual property
     D.   Direct and Manage Project Work and conflict of interest

 80. Which of the following conflict-resolution techniques emphasizes areas of agreement
     rather than areas of difference?
     A. Smoothing
     B.   Compromising
     C.   Reconciling
     D.   Directing

 81. A project sponsor asks the project manager to observe nonverbal feedback in the upcoming
     status meeting and adjust his presentation based on these observations. Which process is
     associated with these activities?
     A. Plan Communications Management
     B.   Manage Communications
     C.   Monitor Communications
     D.   Control Communications

 82. You are using the data representation tool and technique of the Manage Quality process
     with one of the product deliverables to organize potential causes of defects into groups.
     Which tool and technique does this describe?
     A. Interrelationship digraphs
     B.   Matrix diagrams
     C.   Affinity diagrams
     D.   Process decision program charts
                                             Chapter 3      Executing (Domain 3.0)              99



83. You are a project manager for an engineering company. Your company won the bid to
    add ramp-metering lights to several on-ramps along a stretch of highway at the south
    end of the city. You subcontracted a portion of the project to another company. The
    subcontractor's work involves digging the holes and setting the lamp poles in concrete.
    You discover the end product does not meet safety standards, corrective action is needed
    to fix the problems and get the project back on track, and applicable standards were not
    followed. Which of the following is true?
    A. You are in the Manage Communications process and have completed a performance
       review of the contractor's work.
    B.   You are in the Manage Quality process and have performed a quality audit.
    C.   You are in the Manage Quality process and have performed process analysis.
    D.   You are in the Validate Scope process and have performed an inspection to ensure
         correctness of work.

84. Which of the following best describes the purpose of corrective action taken during the
    Executing process activities of the project?
    A. An intentional activity that ensures the future performance of the project work is
       aligned with the project management plan
    B.   An intentional activity to modify a nonconforming product or product component
    C.   An unintentional activity that ensures that the work of the project is aligned with the
         project management plan
    D.   An intentional activity intended to bring the work of the project back into alignment
         with the project management plan

85. Your project includes a new manufacturing technique that requires knowledge of chemical
    engineering to perform one of the services required in the project management plan. The
    service was performed, and as a result, an approved change request has been submitted.
    Which of the following statements is true?
    A. Approved change requests come about as a result of the Direct and Manage Project
       Work process, and the Direct and Manage Project Work process will be repeated in
       order to implement this change.
    B.   Approved change requests are inputs to the Direct and Manage Project Work process,
         and the Direct and Manage Project Work process will be repeated in order to
         implement this change.
    C.   This approved change request is external to the project and is expanding the scope
         of the original project. Therefore, this change request will be addressed during the
         Monitoring and Controlling process group.
    D.   This approved change request is internal to the project and is expanding the scope
         of the original project. Therefore, this change request will be addressed during the
         Monitoring and Controlling process group.
100         Chapter 3         Executing (Domain 3.0)



 86. The tools and techniques of the Acquire Resources process include all of the following
     except for which one?
      A. Multicriteria decision analysis
      B.   Virtual teams
      C.   Resource calendars
      D.   Negotiation

 87. This quality management and control tool consists of two-dimensional diagrams (L-Type,
     T-Type, and X-Type) and three-dimensional diagrams such as C-Type. Which tool within
     this tool and technique does this question describe?
      A. Prioritization matrices
      B.   Tree diagrams
      C.   Matrix diagrams
      D.   PDPC

 88. Marysil is an enterprise project manager for Cups on Fire. To date, she has identified risks,
     analyzed them, and developed risk responses for her project. Now, she and the team are
     executing the work and responding to risk triggers. What project management artifact will
     they need?
      A. Contingency plan
      B.   Risk register
      C.   Risk report
      D.   Fallback plan

 89. You hold a position that is primarily concerned with satisfying stakeholder needs as well
     as issues such as plans, controls, budgets, policies, procedures, and team motivation. You
     have signed a nondisclosure agreement, promising not to give away trade secrets, and you
     have signed a noncompete agreement with your current employer that says you will not go
     to work for a competitor any sooner than 18 months after the date of your termination.
     You will be working with a virtual team, and during the hiring process, the members will
     be required to sign similar agreements, but their noncompete agreement is for 12 months
     rather than 18 months. Because this virtual team will have members from all over the
     globe, you should be concerned with one area in particular of the PMI Code of Ethics and
     Professional Conduct. Which of the following options best describes this situation?
      A. You are a manager, working in the Develop Team process, and need to pay particular
         attention to cultural awareness and diversity training.
      B.   You are a manager, working in the Acquire Resources process, and need to pay
           particular attention to cultural awareness and diversity training.
      C.   You are a manager, working in the Develop Team process, and need to pay particular
           attention to fairness and stakeholder influence.
      D.   You are a manager, working in the Acquire Resources process, and need to pay
           particular attention to fairness and stakeholder influence.
                                             Chapter 3      Executing (Domain 3.0)            101



90. Avoiding, accommodating, reconciling, directing, and problem-solving are all considered
    to be types of what?
    A. Interpersonal and team skills
    B.   Communication skills
    C.   Conflict resolution
    D.   Power

91. A project manager publishes an advertisement for goods needed to complete a major
    deliverable of the project. What key output is she hoping to generate?
    A. Procurement strategy
    B.   Selected sellers
    C.   Independent cost estimates
    D.   Make-or-buy decisions

92. You have selected a vendor and are meeting with them to begin discussing the details
    of the final contract. They tell you that the equipment originally bid in the RFP is
    no longer available. They say the best solution is to buy the new equipment they're
    offering, which costs more than the original equipment. You have concerns that the new
    equipment might not be compatible with existing equipment and discuss this with them.
    After further investigation, it's proven the new equipment will work, and the vendor
    agrees to add some additional training time to help offset the difference in price. Which
    of the following tools and techniques of the Conduct Procurement process does this
    describe?
    A. Procurement negotiation
    B.   Independent estimates
    C.   Proposal evaluation techniques
    D.   Fait accompli

93. All of the following result in a change request, except for which one?
    A. Updates to project documents
    B.   Corrective actions
    C.   Preventive actions
    D.   Defect repairs

94. Sally is a project manager who works at Galactic Kidz. While managing the execution of
    the project team's work, she notices that two critical activities are delayed and decides to
    speak to the project sponsor. What action are Sally and the project sponsor likely to take?
    A. Preventive action
    B.   Defect repair
    C.   Updates to the plan
    D.   Corrective action
102         Chapter 3      Executing (Domain 3.0)



 95. Your project sponsor approaches you with a small bonus check for your excellent work
     keeping costs in line with the budget. You think the amount of the bonus check is fair and
     deserved. All of the following statements are true except for which one?
      A. The reward is appropriately linked to the performance.
      B.   Rewards and recognition systems are informal ways of promoting desirable behavior.
      C.   Rewards and recognition systems are a tool and technique of the Develop Team
           process.
      D.   The reward is in line with the performance, and you should accept it.

 96. Three of your stakeholders have approached you regarding the difficulty they are
     having with one of your team members. This team member is making inappropriate
     jokes, continually interrupts others, and is argumentative and unwilling to listen to the
     stakeholders' ideas. Which of the following is true regarding this situation?
      A. This is referring to training, which is a tool and technique of the Plan Resource
         Management process.
      B.   This is referring to ground rules, which is a tool and technique of the Develop Team
           process.
      C.   This is referring to interpersonal and team skills, which is a tool and technique of the
           Develop Team process.
      D.   This is referring to team-building activities, which is a tool and technique of the
           Manage Team process.

 97. Managing quality is sometimes called what?
      A. Quality management
      B.   Quality adherence
      C.   Quality assurance
      D.   Plan-Do-Check-Act

 98. Alyssa is a project manager tasked with managing an infrastructure project that will
     consolidate five data centers into one. After kicking off the execution of the project work,
     she holds a team-building workshop with the core project team. What project management
     process is she performing?
      A. Acquire Resources
      B.   Develop Team
      C.   Manage Team
      D.   Control Resources

 99. How are quality improvements implemented?
      A. By completing quality audits
      B.   By submitting a change request and/or taking a corrective action
                                            Chapter 3      Executing (Domain 3.0)             103



     C.   By submitting a change request and/or implementing a preventive action
     D.   By completing a quality audit and identifying gaps or shortcomings in the process

100. One of the primary inputs to the Conduct Procurement process is an output of the
                  process and contains responses prepared by the            .
     A. Conduct Procurements, buyer
     B.   Plan Procurement Management, buyer
     C.   Conduct Procurements, seller
     D.   Plan Procurement Management, seller

101. You have just been hired into a new organization. You are working on an RFP and have
     discovered that the qualified sellers list for this organization includes a company owned
     by someone who attended college with you. You have performed a make-or-buy analysis
     and decided it is best to procure the product needed for this project. You are helping the
     procurement group prepare for the upcoming bidder conference and are determining the
     criteria to use to evaluate proposals. You schedule a meeting with your manager and the
     procurement officer to explain your association with one of the vendors. Since you haven't
     seen your college friend in many years, you are certain this won't be a problem. What
     area of the PMI Code of Ethics and Professional Conduct does this question refer to, and
     which process are you conducting?
     A. Conflict of interest and the Control Procurements process
     B.   Ensuring integrity and the Conduct Procurements process
     C.   Ensuring integrity and the Control Procurements process
     D.   Conflict of interest and the Conduct Procurements process

102. Dr. William Ouchi developed a theory that is concerned with increasing employees'
     loyalty to their organizations and places emphasis on the well-being of the employees,
     both at work and outside of work. What is the name of this leadership theory?
     A. Theory Y
     B.   Theory Z
     C.   Theory X
     D.   Theory Y/Z

103. Procurement statement of work, insurance and performance bonds, vendor pricing, and
     payment terms are all elements of what document?
     A. Agreements
     B.   RFP
     C.   Procurement management plan
     D.   Seller proposals
104         Chapter 3      Executing (Domain 3.0)



104. One of your project's deliverables requires skills in journalism. You have three resources
     working on the activities that need to be completed for this deliverable. One of the
     resources is beyond happy with her situation and tells you that she is finally in a project
     where she feels like she is performing at her peak potential. Which of the following
     statements best describes this situation?
      A. This team member is describing the self-actualization level of Maslow's Hierarchy of
         Needs.
      B.   Salary is not a motivator because her basic needs have been fulfilled.
      C.   This team member's need has been fulfilled, and now, according to Maslow, the
           ability to advance, the opportunity to learn new things, and the challenges involved in
           the work become motivators.
      D.   The Expectancy Theory says that the importance of camaraderie with other team
           members is an important motivator.

105. A project manager is preparing to obtain the resources needed to perform the work of the
     project. What project document is the project manager likely to reference as a guide to
     both acquiring and managing the project resources?
      A. Project management plan
      B.   Resource management plan
      C.   Staffing management plan
      D.   Resource requirements

106. Your team has done an outstanding job, and you have notified their functional managers
     that their assignment is over. They are all reluctant to go back to their functional work
     group and are sorry to see the project come to an end. They enjoy working for you and
     say this project, and working for you, has been one of the best experiences of their career.
     Which of the following does this describe?
      A. The adjourning stage of team development
      B.   That you are likely a Theory Y manager
      C.   Maslow's performing level on the Hierarchy of Needs
      D.   Recognition and rewards

107. One of your subproject managers, a recent graduate with limited experience in managing
     projects, prepared a procurement SOW. When you were researching independent
     estimates, you discovered that your vendor's proposals are way off of your expectations.
     You review the SOW and find that it was not detailed enough for the vendor to come
     up with an accurate estimate. Of the following options, which area of the PMI Code of
     Ethics and Professional Conduct does this question relate to, and which process does the
     independent estimates tool and technique belong to?
      A. Contribute to the project management knowledge base and Plan Procurement
         Management
      B.   Ensure personal integrity and professionalism and Control Procurements
      C.   Promote interaction among team members and other stakeholders and Plan
           Procurement Management
      D.   Truthful reporting and Control Procurements
                                              Chapter 3      Executing (Domain 3.0)               105



108. You have examined the problems and constraints experienced while conducting the
     project and identified inefficient and ineffective processes associated with process
     operations. Which tool and technique of the Manage Quality process have you used?
     A. Quality management and control tools
     B.   Quality audits
     C.   Cost-benefit analysis
     D.   Process analysis

109. Which conflict-resolution technique does not result in a permanent resolution?
     A. Withdraw/avoid
     B.   Force/direct
     C.   Collaborate/problem-solve
     D.   Smooth/accommodate

110. Which of the following motivational theories states that the expectation of a positive
     outcome drives motivation?
     A. Expectancy Theory
     B.   Achievement Theory
     C.   Hygiene Theory
     D.   Maslow's Hierarchy of Needs

111. Which of the following is a valid input that a project manager can use to disseminate
     information to appropriate stakeholders?
     A. Communication technology
     B.   Work performance reports
     C.   Project management information system
     D.   Project reporting

112. This win-win conflict-resolution technique is the one that project managers should use
     most.
     A. Collaboration
     B.   Compromise
     C.   Withdrawal
     D.   Smoothing

113. A project manager is overseeing the execution of the team's project activities. She closes
     out the day, satisfied that the team is working together harmoniously and beginning
     to adjust their work habits and behaviors to support one another. Which stage of the
     Tuckman team development ladder is the team currently in?
     A. Forming
     B.   Storming
     C.   Norming
     D.   Performing
106         Chapter 3       Executing (Domain 3.0)



114. You are in the process of translating the quality management plan into executable quality
     activities that account for existing quality policies. What process are you in?
      A. Plan Quality Management
      B.   Manage Quality
      C.   Control Quality
      D.   Validate Scope

115. Your team has done an outstanding job, and you have notified their functional managers
     that their assignment is over. They are all reluctant to go back to their functional work
     group and are sorry to see the project come to an end. They enjoy working for you and
     say this project, and working for you, has been one of the best experiences of their career.
     According to the adjourning phase of team formation, you could take all of the following
     actions except for which one?
      A. Conduct a team celebration
      B.   Thank your team members for their contributions
      C.   Guide the team through a closure process
      D.   Focus on closing out the project management processes

116. You are a project manager for Fly Me to Miami travel services. You are in the process
     of documenting and distributing project information. You know all of the following
     statements are true regarding information exchange except for which one?
      A. Encoding the information involves putting it in a format the listener will understand.
      B.   The receiver is responsible for understanding the information correctly.
      C.   Senders filter the information through their knowledge of the subject, cultural
           influences, language, emotions, attitudes, and geographic location.
      D.   The message is the actual information being sent and received.

117. Availability, experience levels, interests, cost, and abilities of project resources are
     considered part of which input to the Acquire Resources process?
      A. Enterprise environmental factors
      B.   Organizational process assets
      C.   Interpersonal and team skills
      D.   Resource calendars

118. Alyssa is a project manager tasked with managing an infrastructure project that will
     consolidate five data centers into one. After kicking off the execution of the project work,
     she holds a team-building workshop with the core project team. What is she looking to
     achieve?
      A. Address people-related corrective actions
      B.   Resolve existing conflicts
      C.   Enhance team competencies
      D.   Improve overall project performance
                                             Chapter 3      Executing (Domain 3.0)            107



119. One of your project's deliverables requires skills in business analysis. You have three
     resources working on the activities that need to be completed for this deliverable. Jim
     and John are making more in salary than Mary is. Jim tends to spend a large majority of
     his time on social networking sites, John is motivated by accomplishment and capability,
     and Mary is looking for a sense of belonging as part of the team. Which of the following
     statements is true?
     A. Your resources are at various levels of Maslow's Hierarchy of Needs.
     B.   McClelland contends that salary is a self-esteem need.
     C.   The Expectancy Theory says that salary isn't a motivator regardless of pay
          discrepancies.
     D.   The Achievement Theory contends that salary is tied to achievement, so large
          disparities in salary become a demotivator.

120. You are in the midst of some difficult procurement negotiations. The schedule,
     service-level agreements, and incentives have not been agreed upon. One of the parties
     representing the vendor lashes out at you during the negotiations. You were not expecting
     this outburst and are just about to stoop to their level when you remember which of the
     following in reference to the PMI Code of Ethics and Professional Conduct and the
     process you are currently performing?
     A. Your actions and you should maintain respect even though the other party is out of
        control. The Control Procurements process can be difficult when you are negotiating
        complex contracts.
     B.   You can't control the actions of others, but you can control your actions, and you
          should ensure personal integrity by controlling yourself even though the other party
          is out of control. The Control Procurements process can be difficult when you are
          negotiating complex contracts.
     C.   You can't control the actions of others, but you can control your actions, and you
          should maintain respect even though the other party is out of control. The Conduct
          Procurements process can be difficult when you are negotiating complex contracts.
     D.   You can't control the actions of others, but you can control your actions, and you
          should ensure personal integrity by controlling yourself even though the other party
          is out of control. The Conduct Procurements process can be difficult when you are
          negotiating complex contracts.

121. Rianna is a developer who is interested in moving toward a career in project management.
     She takes on a small project that will implement a new security feature to protect her
     company's internal network. To date, she has baselined the project's scope, schedule, and
     budget, and she is now actively helping to resolve issues as they arise. What process is she
     currently performing?
     A. Plan Resource Management
     B.   Develop Team
     C.   Manage Team
     D.   Control Resources
108         Chapter 3        Executing (Domain 3.0)



122. Herzberg's Hygiene Theory notes that there are two factors that contribute to motivation,
     one being hygiene factors. Which of the following represents the second factor?
      A. Hygiene
      B.   Motivators
      C.   Self-actualization
      D.   Basic needs

123. Rachel is a project sponsor of a project that is developing a new innovative line of screen doors
     meant to attract budget-minded consumers. Most project managers cringe when assigned to a
     project sponsored by Rachel since she tends to hover for the details and tends to be suspicious
     of every team member's behavior, causing a flurry of issues for the project manager to resolve.
     According to Douglas McGregor's leadership theory, what type of manager is Rachel?
      A. Theory Y
      B.   Theory Z
      C.   Theory X
      D.   Theory Y/Z

124. You have a very energetic project team. They are motivated by results, have good conflict-
     resolution skills, and are highly committed to the project, among other things. They have
     a solid understanding of the project goals and objectives and understand the direction the
     project is headed in. Which of the following does this describe?
      A. The norming stage of team formation
      B.   The characteristics of an effective team
      C.   The transactional-style leadership the project manager employs
      D.   The Expectancy Theory

125. You are working on a project with contentious team members. You know if you resolve
     the conflicts, it will result in increased productivity and better working relationships.
     You pull the team together in a meeting to discuss the issue. You allow everyone to
     express their viewpoint, and as a result, some team members gain an understanding of
     the perspective of some of their teammates that they didn't have before this meeting. At
     the conclusion of the meeting, consensus is reached, and the team members thank you for
     taking the time to get them together and asking them to discuss this issue. Which of the
     following conflict-resolution techniques does this describe?
      A. Compromise/reconcile
      B.   Force/direct
      C.   Smooth/accommodate
      D.   Collaborate/problem-solve

126. Forming, storming, norming, performing, and adjourning are all phases of what?
      A. Maslow's Hierarchy of Needs
      B.   Tuckman's team development model
      C.   Herzberg's Motivation-Hygiene Theory
      D.   Vroom's Expectancy Theory
                                              Chapter 3       Executing (Domain 3.0)           109



127. Which of the following best defines virtual teams?
     A. Groups of people with a shared goal who are dispersed across various locations
     B.   Groups of colocated people with a shared goal who fulfill their roles with little or no
          time spent meeting face to face
     C.   Groups of people with a shared goal who fulfill their roles with little or no time spent
          meeting face to face
     D.   Groups of people with varying goals who fulfill their roles with little or no time spent
          meeting face to face

128. Your manager knocks on your door and asks whether you have time to discuss the recent
     draft status report you sent her for review. She knows you are interested in performing
     at your best, but it seems that the third paragraph of the status report may contain a
     misstatement. She diligently listens to your explanation and realizes that her assumptions
     were incorrect. She explains that if she misunderstood, others might also. She asks if
     you wouldn't mind taking a stab at clarifying this paragraph. Which theory does your
     manager practice?
     A. Achievement Theory
     B.   Expectancy Theory
     C.   Contingency Theory
     D.   Theory Y

129. As a result of a face-to-face meeting you recently had, you have resolved an issue and have
     come away with an update to the issue log, change requests, project management plan
     updates, and project documents updates, and you have submitted a change request. You
     know all of the following are true regarding this except which one?
     A. This describes the Manage Communications process.
     B.   The issue log acts like an action item log in this process.
     C.   Issues should be ranked and prioritized.
     D.   Responsible parties and due dates should be assigned to each issue.

130. You have a very energetic project team. One of your team members has been classified
     by his teammates as brilliant. The team members are motivated by results, have good
     conflict-resolution skills, and are highly committed to the project, among other things.
     They have a solid understanding of the project goals and objectives and understand the
     direction the project is headed in. When their brilliant teammate questions the approach
     the team is using regarding one of the goals, you ask the team for their input and gather
     the facts before making a decision. You ask the team what they would do, and their
     conclusion is that the brilliant teammate is right and it's better to go with his solution
     than the one they planned. What type of power is the teammate displaying, and what
     leadership style does the project manager possess based on this question?
     A. Expert, democratic
     B.   Referent, democratic
     C.   Expert, situational
     D.   Legitimate, situational
110         Chapter 3      Executing (Domain 3.0)



131. Rianna is a developer who is interested in moving toward a career in project management.
     She takes on a small project that will implement a new security feature to protect her
     company's internal network. To date, she has baselined the project's scope, schedule, and
     budget, and she is now actively helping to resolve issues as they arise. What outcome is she
     looking to produce?
      A. Optimize project performance
      B.   Improve competencies
      C.   Improve team interaction
      D.   Allocate resources appropriately

132. Which of the following is a valid input that aids the project manager in managing the
     overall work of the project?
      A. Project documents
      B.   Expert judgment
      C.   Issue log
      D.   Work performance data

133. You are using the project reporting tool and technique along with others from this process,
     such as the following: communication technology, communication skills, communication
     methods, interpersonal and team skills, meetings, and information management systems.
     The vice president of your division has told you to report the status of the project budget
     as good. You have experienced three budget overruns in the past 6 months and know that
     the status of the budget is poor. However, you also know there is a repayment coming on
     one of the procurement work orders that will reverse almost all of the cost overruns you've
     experienced to date. You know that all of the following are true regarding this question
     except for which one?
      A. You can't control the actions of others, but you can control your actions, and you
         should report the truth no matter what the vice president has instructed you to do.
      B.   This question describes the Manage Stakeholder Engagement process.
      C.   Project communications are an output of this process and are usually comprised of
           performance reports, deliverables status, schedule progress, and cost incurred.
      D.   You use the project management information systems tool and technique of this
           process to distribute the project status report by posting it on the project website on
           the company intranet.

134. Your co-worker, Mishi, is a project manager who has come by this title through experience.
     He hasn't had any formal training in project management and isn't familiar with the best
     practices described in the PMBOK(R) Guide. Mishi has gathered and recorded information
     about the outcomes of the work his team has completed, including activity completion dates,
     status and quality of the deliverables, and more. You are a certified PMP and know that
     according to the PMBOK(R) Guide, Mishi has just accomplished which of the following?
      A. Mishi is working on the deliverables output of the Direct and Manage Project Work
         process.
      B.   Mishi has documented work performance information, which is an output of the
           Direct and Manage Project Work process.
                                             Chapter 3        Executing (Domain 3.0)             111



     C.   Mishi is working on the project management plan documents input of the Direct and
          Manage Project Work process.
     D.   Mishi has conferred with the team and used expert judgment, a tool and technique of
          the Direct and Manage Project Work process, to document project updates.

135. Knowledge that is difficult to express is called what?
     A. Explicit knowledge
     B.   Tacit knowledge
     C.   Tangible knowledge
     D.   Formal knowledge

136. You are working on a project with contentious team members. You know if you resolve
     the conflicts, it will result in increased productivity and better working relationships.
     Most conflicts come about as a result of all the following except for which one?
     A. Scheduling issues
     B.   Availability of resources
     C.   Personal work habits
     D.   Cultural differences

137. This motivational theory is a combination of Theory Y behaviors and the Hygiene Theory.
     A. Tannenbaum and Schmidt Continuum Management Theory
     B.   Situational Leadership Theory
     C.   Contingency Theory
     D.   Recognition and Rewards Theory

138. All of the following are outputs of the Manage Communications process except for which
     one?
     A. Project document updates
     B.   Project management plan updates
     C.   Work performance reports
     D.   Organizational process assets updates

139. You are a senior project manager working at a manufacturing plant that produces
     components used by the aviation industry. You have just finalized team assignments. What
     action are you likely to perform next?
     A. Control resources
     B.   Develop the team
     C.   Develop the training plan
     D.   Review pre-assignments
112        Chapter 3       Executing (Domain 3.0)



140. This process is where activities are clarified, the work of the project is authorized to begin,
     and resources are committed who then carry out their assigned activities to create the
     product or service of the project. Which process does this describe?
      A. Develop Project Management Plan
      B.   Direct and Manage Project Work
      C.   Develop Schedule
      D.   Develop Team

141. Which project management process produces vendor agreements?
      A. Plan Procurement Management
      B.   Acquire Resources
      C.   Conduct Procurements
      D.   Control Procurements

142. The purpose of this process is concerned with satisfying the needs of the stakeholders,
     managing communications with them, resolving issues, managing their expectations, and
     more, and this process also relates to this area of the PMI Code of Ethics and Professional
     Conduct, respectively.
      A. Manage Stakeholder Engagement and the Role Delineation Study
      B.   Control Stakeholder Engagement and the Role Delineation Study
      C.   Control Stakeholder Engagement and Professional Responsibility
      D.   Manage Stakeholder Engagement and Professional Responsibility

143. Maslow's Hierarchy of Needs is a motivational theory that notes that humans have five
     basic needs arranged in a hierarchical order. What is the highest set of needs of the five
     within the hierarchy?
      A. Social needs
      B.   Safety and security needs
      C.   Self-actualization
      D.   Basic physical needs

144. You are in the process of facilitating a change control meeting. You review a change
     request that would double the scope of the project but would not yield a major increase
     in the project's resulting benefits. You know that the submitter of the change request has
     a tendency to bloat a project's scope without fully thinking through the impact, but as a
     result of their position in the company, their changes tend to be approved. What type of
     power does the submitter of the change request typically use?
      A. Legitimate
      B.   Expert
                                             Chapter 3      Executing (Domain 3.0)            113



     C.   Referent
     D.   Punishment

145. According to the PMBOK(R) Guide, all of the following mean the same as contract except
     which one?
     A. Purchase order
     B.   Memorandum of understanding
     C.   Agreement
     D.   Procurement order

146. Who developed the model that defines the stages of a team's development?
     A. Bruce Tuckman
     B.   Victor Vroom
     C.   David McClelland
     D.   Abraham Maslow

147. What plan from a prior process is put into action during the process that is concerned
     with gathering, creating, storing, distributing, retrieving, and disposing of project
     information?
     A. Scope management plan
     B.   Resource management plan
     C.   Stakeholder engagement plan
     D.   Communications management plan

148. You are in the Manage Team process and preparing for your individual team members'
     performance assessments. All of the following inputs will assist you with this process
     except for which one?
     A. Work performance reports
     B.   Project management information system
     C.   Resource management plan
     D.   Team performance assessments

149. David McClelland is responsible for which motivational theory that states that people are
     motivated by three things, two of which are power and affiliation?
     A. Expectancy Theory
     B.   Achievement Theory
     C.   Hygiene Theory
     D.   Maslow's Hierarchy of Needs
114        Chapter 3      Executing (Domain 3.0)



150. The elements of communication are incorporated within the models of communication
     exchange. They are best explained as which of the following?
      A. The elements of communication include encode, transmit, acknowledge, and
         feedback/response, and the communication model includes senders, receivers, and
         messages.
      B.   The elements of communication include senders, receivers, and messages and the
           communication model includes verbal and written.
      C.   The elements of communication include senders, receivers, and messages and the
           communication model includes encode, transmit, acknowledge, and feedback/
           response.
      D.   The elements of communication includes encode, transmit, acknowledge, and
           feedback/response, and the communication model includes verbal and written.

151. Each of the following is a key input to Acquire Resources that you should consider when
     performing the process, except for which one?
      A. Resource calendars
      B.   Resource requirements
      C.   Stakeholder register
      D.   Project team assignments

152. What output of the Develop Team process involves determining and documenting a team's
     effectiveness?
      A. Team performance assessments
      B.   Project performance appraisals
      C.   Organizational process assets updates
      D.   Enterprise environmental factors updates

153. Status review meetings are an important tool for informing stakeholders (and others) of
     the status of the project. All of the following are true regarding status review meetings
     except for which one?
      A. They are a form of communication and include verbal and written material.
      B.   Verbally communicating at a status meeting is less complicated and more easily
           understood than written communication.
      C.   You might have multiple status review meetings, each intended for different audiences.
      D.   Face-to-face meetings are more effective for team members than status review
           meetings because you'll learn of potential risks and problems more quickly.
                                               Chapter 3       Executing (Domain 3.0)             115



154. You're the project manager for Dream Clinics, a research organization that specializes
     in sleep disorders. You're working on an internal service project and are in the Executing
     process group. You negotiate with a manager to obtain resources for specific activities on
     the project that your team is not able to fulfill. These resources will roll off the project as
     soon as the activities are completed. Which of the following does this question describe?
      A. Resource requirements, which are an output of Plan Resource Management
      B.   Interpersonal and team skills, which are a tool and technique of Acquire Resources
      C.   Staffing requirements, which are an input to Acquire Resources
      D.   Resource pool description, which is an input to Plan Resource Management

155. Maslow's Hierarchy of Needs is a motivational theory that notes that humans have five
     basic needs arranged in a hierarchical order. What is the first set of needs that must be met
     before a person can move to the next level of needs in the hierarchy?
      A. Social needs
      B.   Safety and security needs
      C.   Self-actualization
      D.   Basic physical needs

156. Knowledge that can be codified using images, numbers, and words is called what?
      A. Explicit knowledge
      B.   Tacit knowledge
      C.   Tangible knowledge
      D.   Formal knowledge

157. You are in the Manage Team process and preparing for your individual team members'
     performance assessments. You will use one of the tools and techniques of this process
     to determine each team member's leadership, influencing, and effective decision-making
     capabilities. Which tool and technique is this referring to?
      A. Interpersonal and team skills
      B.   Observation and conversation
      C.   Leadership skills
      D.   General management skills

158. Legitimate, expert, referent, and punishment are all types of what?
     A. Interpersonal and team skills
     B.    Communication skills
     C.    Conflict resolution
     D.    Power
116        Chapter 3      Executing (Domain 3.0)



159. You are a project manager for an engineering company. Your company won the bid to
     add ramp-metering lights to several on-ramps along a stretch of highway at the south
     end of the city. You subcontracted a portion of the project to another company. The
     subcontractor's work involves digging the holes and setting the lamp poles in concrete.
     You've discovered the subcontractor's work is not correct because the poles are not buried
     to the correct depth. You review the work and note gaps in the process and a lack of safety
     standards as a result of this error. Which of the following is true?
      A. You are in the Manage Quality process and have performed a quality audit and
         identified a need for a corrective action.
      B.   You are in the Validate Scope process and have performed a quality audit to ensure
           correctness of work.
      C.   You are in the Control Procurements process and have completed a contract audit to
           ensure that the subcontractor's performance meets the contract requirements.
      D.   You are in the Close Project or Phase process and have completed a performance
           review of the contractor's work.

160. The primary focus of this process is on individual team members and their performance.
      A. Acquire Resources
      B.   Develop Team
      C.   Manage Team
      D.   Manage Resource Plan

161. You are a senior project manager working at a manufacturing plant that produces
     components used by the aviation industry. You are in the process of implementing
     approved changes. What key information will you need to successfully complete the
     associated activities?
      A. Lessons learned register
      B.   Change requests
      C.   Approved change requests
      D.   Project schedule
Chapter   Monitoring and

 4
          Controlling
          (Domain 4.0)

          The Project Management
          Professional (PMP)(R) exam
          content from the Monitoring
          and Controlling the Project
          performance domain covered in this
          chapter includes the following:

           Measure project performance using appropriate tools and
           techniques in order to identify and quantify any variances
           and corrective actions.

           Manage changes to the project by following the changed
           management plan in order to ensure that project goals
           remain aligned with business needs.

           Verify that project deliverables conform to the quality
           standards established in the quality management plan by
           using appropriate tools and techniques to meet project
           requirements and business needs.

           Monitor and assess risk by determining whether exposure
           has changed and evaluating the effectiveness of response
           strategies in order to manage the impact of risks and
           opportunities on the project.

           Review the issue log, update if necessary, and determine
           corrective actions by using appropriate tools and
           techniques in order to minimize the impact on the
           project.

           Capture, analyze, and manage lessons learned, using
           lessons learned management techniques in order to
           enable continuous improvement.
 Monitor procurement activities according to the pro-
 curement plan in order to verify compliance with project
 objectives.


               The process names, inputs, tools and techniques,
               outputs, and descriptions of the project manage-
               ment process groups and related materials and
               figures in this chapter are based on content from
               A Guide to the Project Management Body
               of Knowledge (PMBOK (R) Guide), Sixth Edition
               (PMI(R), 2017).
                        Chapter 4      Monitoring and Controlling (Domain 4.0)                 119



1. All of the following statements are true regarding configuration management except
   which one?
   A. The configuration management system is a subset of the records management
      system.
   B.   Change control systems are a subset of the configuration management system.
   C.   Configuration control is managed through the configuration management system and
        is concerned with changes to the specifications of the deliverables.
   D.   Configuration control is managed through the configuration management system and
        is concerned with changes to the project management processes.

2. All of the following are true regarding the Monitor and Control Project Work process
   except for which one?
   A. This process is responsible for reporting and comparing actual project results against
      the project management plan.
   B.   This process monitors approved change requests and documents appropriate product
        information.
   C.   This process is responsible for executing the planned project activities to complete
        project deliverables.
   D.   This process analyzes performance data and determines whether corrective or
        preventive action is needed.

3. Your organization is experiencing a shake-up at the top levels of management. Your project
   team has expressed concerns that their project might be canceled because of the changes
   going on at the top. Sure enough, your project team was correct in their suspicions. You've
   received notice that the project is canceled. The team has one remaining deliverable for
   the project that was scheduled for completion next month. Your next step is to document
   the work results to date. Which of the following describes the tools and techniques of the
   process this question describes?
   A. Information management systems, expert judgment, and meetings
   B.   Seven basic quality tools, statistical sampling, inspection, and approved change
        requests review
   C.   Inspection and decision-making techniques
   D.   Variance analysis

4. These processes are responsible for adjusting stakeholder engagement and communication
   strategies and plans, based on how the project is progressing and how the results compare
   to the plan.
   A. Monitor Communications and Monitor Stakeholder Engagement
   B.   Manage Communications and Manage Stakeholder Engagement
   C.   Plan Communications Management and Plan Stakeholder Engagement
   D.   Direct and Manage Project Work and Monitor and Control Project Work
120         Chapter 4       Monitoring and Controlling (Domain 4.0)



  5. If earned value = 500, planned value = 700, and actual costs = 450, what is the schedule
     variance?
      A. -200
      B.   200
      C.   -50
      D.   50

  6. You are working on a project that involves multiple vendors. One of the vendors has been
     difficult to work with and is not very cooperative. You have received the latest invoice
     from them for services and disagree with them about the charges they have listed for the
     change request that was submitted last month. When you called and spoke with your
     representative at the company, they refused to budge on the charges. You will likely need
     to use an alternative dispute resolution (ADR) to get to the bottom of this matter. Which
     tool and technique of the Control Procurements process does this question describe?
      A. Payment systems
      B.   Claims administration
      C.   Procurement performance reviews
      D.   Contract change control system

  7. While carrying out the Monitor and Control Project Work process, a project manager
     analyzes performance data to determine whether any corrective or preventive action is
     needed. Which of the following is a valid input that can assist the project manager in
     performing this activity?
      A. Variance analysis
      B.   Work performance information
      C.   Work performance data
      D.   Expert judgment

  8. You are a project manager for Community Trends, a nonprofit organization. Your project
     has come about because of a social need. So far, the project has experienced some cost
     variances, but these variances are atypical and are not expected to continue. You know
     the following information: BAC = 900, EAC = 885, PV = 475, EV = 500, and AC = 425.
     Which of the following is the correct ETC given this information?
      A. 400
      B.   460
      C.   471
      D.   Re-estimate

  9. All of the following are tools and techniques of the Perform Integrated Change Control
     process except for which one?
      A. Change control meetings
      B.   Change control tools
                          Chapter 4      Monitoring and Controlling (Domain 4.0)              121



    C.   Expert judgment
    D.   Project management information systems

10. A project manager has recently communicated a complete performance index of 1.0 to the
    project sponsor. What does this mean?
    A. That it will be difficult to complete the project within set targets
    B.   That the project must continue performing at the current rate to complete within
         target
    C.   That it will be relatively easy to complete the project within set targets
    D.   That it will be impossible to complete the project within set targets

11. All of the following are true regarding the Control Costs process except for which one?
    A. It is the process responsible for aggregating the estimated costs to establish an
       authored cost baseline.
    B.   It is the fourth and final process of the Project Cost Management Knowledge Area.
    C.   It belongs to the Monitoring and Controlling process group.
    D.   It uses earned value analysis to calculate work performance information and cost
         forecasts.

12. If you know that EV = 114, PV = 120, and AC = 103, what are CPI and SPI, respectively?
    A. 1.1 and .95
    B.   1.2 and 1.05
    C.   1.05 and 1.2
    D.   .95 and 1.1

13. A project manager has executed work, producing a key deliverable. What process is he
    likely to perform next?
    A. Direct and Manage Project Work
    B.   Develop Project Management Plan
    C.   Perform Integrated Change Control
    D.   Monitor and Control Project Work

14. Carina is a principal project manager of You've Got Dogs, a specialty company that
    creates custom dog apparel and toys. As part of her practice, she sits down with her
    sponsor to evaluate how the project is performing by comparing the performance
    measurement baseline against actual schedule and cost performance. What technique is
    Carina using?
    A. Variance analysis
    B.   Earned value analysis
    C.   Technical performance analysis
    D.   Trend analysis
122         Chapter 4       Monitoring and Controlling (Domain 4.0)



 15. David is a project manager working for a prominent book publishing company. As the
     most senior project manager within the organization, he often gets the most complex
     project assignments. As part of his current project, he oversees the inspection of
     deliverables, measuring them against documented requirements and acceptance criteria.
     What project management process is he performing?
      A. Control Scope
      B.   Validate Scope
      C.   Control Quality
      D.   Manage Quality

 16. You work for Sergio's, a golf equipment manufacturer. Your organization is installing
     some new manufacturing equipment, and you are managing the project. You are preparing
     a report, and one of the numbers your sponsor is asking for is the estimate at completion.
     You are using the most common method of calculating EAC. If EV = 145, PV = 162,
     AC = 138, BAC = 200, and ETC = 62, what is EAC?
      A. 190.4
      B.   193
      C.   201
      D.   200

 17. This tool and technique of the Control Procurements process refers to a structured review
     of the work being performed by the contractor. Which tool and technique does this
     question describe?
      A. Payment systems
      B.   Claims administration system
      C.   Contract change control system
      D.   Inspection

 18. LaFawnduh is a project manager working for Dancing Apron, a company that combines
     cooking with simple children's cooking recipes and music. Her latest project involves the
     release of the company's first digital product, which parents will be able to purchase and
     download online. While overseeing the project, LaFawnduh notices that recent stakeholder
     engagement levels have dropped significantly, and they've begun to disagree during status
     meetings. She decides to evaluate their engagement levels using prioritized criteria and
     weights that she documented in the stakeholder engagement plan so that she can share and
     discuss the results with the project sponsor. What process is LaFawnduh performing?
      A. Plan Stakeholder Engagement
      B.   Manage Stakeholder Engagement
      C.   Control Stakeholder Engagement
      D.   Monitor Stakeholder Engagement
                         Chapter 4        Monitoring and Controlling (Domain 4.0)          123



19. Monitor and Control Project Work, Perform Integrated Change Control, and Validate
    Scope are processes that belong to what process group?
    A. Planning
    B.   Executing
    C.   Monitoring and Controlling
    D.   Closing

20. Several processes in the Monitoring and Controlling process group involve change
    requests. Which of the following is not true?
    A. Approved change requests are an input to the Control Procurements and Control
       Quality processes.
    B.   Approved change requests are an output of the Perform Integrated Change Control
         and Monitor Risks process.
    C.   Inspection is a tool and technique of Control Quality.
    D.   Changes are verified as part of the Control Scope process.

21. Roshoud is the VP of customer operations for Galactic Kidz and the project sponsor of the
    latest project, called Project G. He sits down with Sally, the project manager, to discuss
    resource utilization on the project. He expresses concern after recently hearing in the
    hallway that planned resources have been unavailable. Sally admits that this has been the
    case and that it has set the project back unexpectedly. What did Sally fail to do in this
    scenario?
    A. Properly plan the schedule
    B.   Keep the sponsor informed
    C.   Procure the right resources
    D.   Build the right relationships

22. You are a project manager for Community Trends, a nonprofit organization. Your project
    has come about because of a social need. You're calculating performance measurements
    and using actual costs to date, and you assume that ETC work will be completed at the
    budgeted rate. You know the following information: BAC = 900, ETC = 65, PV = 500,
    EV = 475, and AC = 425. Which of the following is the correct expected total cost at
    completion, given this situation?
    A. 379
    B.   804
    C.   875
    D.   850

23. All of the following are outputs of the Validate Scope process except for which one?
    A. Verified deliverables
    B.   Accepted deliverables
    C.   Change requests
    D.   Work performance information
124         Chapter 4      Monitoring and Controlling (Domain 4.0)



 24. The project manager is in the process of bringing the relevant parties together, along with
     a neutral party, to discuss a contested change to a procurement agreement. Which of the
     following is a valid tool or technique to assist the project manager in performing this
     activity?
      A. Claims administration
      B.   Change control system
      C.   Audit
      D.   Inspection

 25. Calculate the to-complete performance index (TCPI) based on the current EAC, using the
     following values: BAC = 15,000, AC = 12,000, EV = 10,000, EAC = 17,000.
      A. 0.50
      B.   1.67
      C.   1.0
      D.   Insufficient information provided

 26. Your project sponsor has asked you for a forecast of the likely cost to complete the work of
     the project. Which of the following statements is true?
      A. You'll use the ETC calculation, which is part of the forecasting tool and technique of
         the Control Costs process.
      B.   You'll use the EAC calculation, which is part of the forecasting tool and technique of
           the Control Costs process.
      C.   You'll use the ETC calculation, which is part of the EVM tool and technique of the
           Control Costs process.
      D.   You'll use the EAC calculation, which is part of the EVM tool and technique of the
           Control Costs process.

 27. You are in the Control Procurements process and are updating some information
     regarding some of your vendors, such as contract documents, warranties, performance
     information, payment records, and inspection/audit results. Which of the following
     outputs does this describe?
      A. Organizational process assets updates
      B.   Project management plan updates
      C.   Work performance information
      D.   Project documents updates

 28. All of the following are tools and techniques of the Control Costs process except for which
     one?
      A. Expert judgment
      B.   Data analysis
                           Chapter 4      Monitoring and Controlling (Domain 4.0)            125



    C.   To-complete performance index
    D.   Cost forecasts

29. A project manager is managing the work of a vendor, who has produced 75 percent of
    the work committed to in the contract. Recently, a change was submitted by the vendor,
    which was approved by the project's change control board. The project manager facilitates
    the next steps in applying the approved changes. What project management process is she
    performing?
    A. Direct and Manage Project Work
    B.   Control Procurements
    C.   Perform Integrated Change Control
    D.   Conduct Procurements

30. This tool and technique of the Control Costs process is the projected or estimated cost
    performance that the remaining work of the project must achieve to meet the BAC or EAC.
    A. EV
    B.   Forecast
    C.   TCPI
    D.   VAC

31. Who is chartered with the authority to approve or deny change requests as defined by the
    organization?
    A. Project manager
    B.   Project sponsor
    C.   Change control board
    D.   Executive team

32. Which of the following measurements is the value of the work actually completed?
    A. AC
    B.   EV
    C.   PV
    D.   EAC

33. The project team recently participated in a working session to examine and document
    the effectiveness of risk responses in dealing with overall project risk. What project
    management process are they performing?
    A. Identify Risks
    B.   Plan Risk Responses
    C.   Implement Risk Responses
    D.   Monitor Risks
126         Chapter 4       Monitoring and Controlling (Domain 4.0)



 34. Nicolas is the project manager of a project that has been described as revolutionizing the
     mobile fitness tracking industry. He prepares for a meeting with the project's sponsor to
     discuss the performance of their largest vendor. What information will Nicolas need to
     reference to provide this information?
      A. Data analysis
      B.   Project management plan
      C.   Agreement
      D.   Procurement documentation

 35. What group is responsible for reviewing all change requests and approving or denying them?
      A. TCB
      B.   CCB
      C.   CRB
      D.   ECB

 36. Your customer has decided that you cannot go forward with the project you're managing
     without a change to the agreed-upon WBS. A contract amendment is agreed on and
     signed, the change control system processes are followed, and you modify the appropriate
     planning documents to reflect the change. As a result of the approved change, substantial
     updates to the project costs and the project schedule occur as well. Which of the following
     is not true regarding this situation?
      A. Baselines must be adjusted to reflect the new project costs and schedule.
      B.   The PMB includes management reserves and contingencies.
      C.   The PMB is determined using EVM.
      D.   The schedule, scope, and cost baseline together make up the PMB.

 37. You are working on a critical project for your organization. The CEO has made it clear
     this is a top priority. One of the key stakeholders on your project resigned, and her
     replacement started about 3 weeks ago. She does not make time for you or seem to have
     the same level of urgency regarding this project as the CEO. You are concerned with
     overall project success and want to efficiently manage the processes involved with this
     project. Which of the following addresses this situation?
      A. Monitor Stakeholder Engagement
      B.   Monitor and Control Project Work
      C.   Monitor Communications
      D.   Perform Integrated Change Control

 38. The project team recently participated in a working session to examine and document the
     effectiveness of risk responses in dealing with overall project risk. What is this working
     session, or meeting, called?
      A. Status meeting
      B.   Technical performance assessment
      C.   Risk review
      D.   Brainstorming
                         Chapter 4      Monitoring and Controlling (Domain 4.0)                  127



39. A project manager recently received agreement to crash the schedule. He begins
    negotiating with the head of development to utilize their most senior Java developer. What
    project management process is the project manager currently using?
    A. Control Schedule
    B.   Control Resources
    C.   Control Costs
    D.   Monitor and Control Project Work

40. All of the following statements are true regarding trend analysis except for which one?
    A. Trend analysis is a tool and technique of the Control Costs process.
    B.   Trend analysis is a mathematical formula used to forecast future outcomes.
    C.   Trend analysis determines whether project performance is improving or worsening
         over time.
    D.   Trend analysis is used to analyze how problems occur.

41. You are using a technique in the Control Costs process and are trying to determine
    whether project performance is improving or worsening over time by periodically
    analyzing project results. Which of the following tools and techniques does this describe?
    A. Forecasting
    B.   This describes trend analysis, which is part of the data analysis tool and technique.
    C.   This describes variance analysis, which is a part of the performance reviews tool and
         technique.
    D.   Statistical sampling

42. All of the following are true regarding the Control Procurements process except for
    which one?
    A. It is where vendor disputes are managed, including through arbitration.
    B.   It produces work performance information containing an analysis of vendor
         performance.
    C.   It is responsible for closing out contracts, with closed procurements as an output.
    D.   It is the third of four processes within the Project Procurement Management
         Knowledge Area.

43. You are the project manager for a project that will produce a mobile phone application
    that sends alerts when UV rays are at dangerous levels, alerting users to stay indoors. You
    are in the process of measuring schedule performance against the schedule baseline. These
    activities are associated with what process group?
    A. Initiating
    B.   Planning
    C.   Executing
    D.   Monitoring and Controlling
128         Chapter 4      Monitoring and Controlling (Domain 4.0)



 44. David is a project manager working for a prominent book publishing company. As the
     most senior project manager within the organization, he often gets the most complex
     project assignments. For this reason, the PMO manager assigns David to manage a project
     for a sponsor who is notorious for scope creep. Knowing this, David is likely to place
     greater emphasis on what project management process?
      A. Validate Scope
      B.   Monitor and Control Project Work
      C.   Control Quality
      D.   Control Scope

 45. You are the project manager for Ooh La La Beauty Products. Your project concerns
     developing a new line of bath products. You also serve on the CCB, and they have just
     approved a scope change. You know that all of the following statements are true except
     which one?
      A. Scope changes include modifications to the agreed-upon WBS.
      B.   Scope changes could result in schedule revisions.
      C.   Scope changes do not usually impact the project budget.
      D.   Scope changes should be reflected in the product scope.

 46. David is a project manager working for a prominent book publishing company. As the
     most senior project manager within the organization, he often gets the most complex
     project assignments. As part of his current project, he oversees the inspection of
     deliverables, measuring them against documented requirements and acceptance criteria.
     What does he hope to achieve as part of carrying out these activities?
      A. Work performance information
      B.   Change requests
      C.   Accepted deliverables
      D.   Updates to the plan

 47. You are working on a critical project for your organization. The CEO has made it clear this
     is a top priority. One of the key stakeholders on your project resigned, and her replacement
     started about 3 weeks ago. She does not make time for you or seem to have the same level of
     urgency regarding this project as the CEO. You are concerned with overall project success
     and want to efficiently manage the processes involved with this project. All of the following
     are tools and techniques of the process this question refers to except for which one?
      A. Meetings
      B.   Data analysis
      C.   Ground rules
      D.   Decision-making

 48. Which of the following is not true about the Control Schedule process?
      A. It establishes leads and lags for the first time by performing earned value analysis.
      B.   It evaluates whether corrective or preventive action is needed to complete the project
           on schedule.
                          Chapter 4      Monitoring and Controlling (Domain 4.0)               129



    C.   It uses schedule variance and schedule performance index calculations to assess any
         variation in the schedule baseline.
    D.   It performs reserve analysis and resource optimization techniques.

49. Your project sponsor has asked you to monitor the project results for conformity to
    standards. You will use the tool and techniques of the Control Quality process to help
    accomplish this. You know that these tools can be used with which of the following to help
    identify and resolve problems related to quality defects?
    A. Expert judgment
    B.   Facilitation techniques
    C.   Plan-Do-Check-Act cycle
    D.   Alternatives generation

50. Sally and Joe are two project managers working in the corporate offices of a popular
    fast-food franchise. They are both studying for their PMP certification and are reviewing
    processes pertaining to the Project Procurement Management Knowledge Area. They
    disagree on which process is responsible for performing activities relating to closure of
    procurements. Sally insists it's the Close Project or Phase process, while Joe argues that it
    is the Control Procurements process. Who is right?
    A. Sally
    B.   Joe
    C.   Neither
    D.   Both

51. You are the project manager for Ooh La La Beauty Products. Your project concerns
    developing a new line of bath products. A quality inspection of one of the new products
    reveals that the product is nonconforming. Which of the following result in conforming or
    nonconforming measurements?
    A. Control measurements
    B.   Attributes sampling
    C.   Variances
    D.   Common causes of variance

52. If earned value = 500, planned value = 700, and actual costs = 450, what is the cost
    variance?
    A. -200
    B.   200
    C.   -50
    D.   50
130         Chapter 4      Monitoring and Controlling (Domain 4.0)



 53. LaFawnduh is a project manager working for Dancing Apron, a company that combines
     cooking with simple children's cooking recipes and music. Her latest project involves the
     release of the company's first digital product that parents will be able to purchase and
     download online. Kip, who is the sponsor of the project, asks her to calculate the estimate
     at completion (EAC) assuming that the work will be accomplished at the planned rate.
     LaFawnduh knows that they have spent $15,000 to date of the $20,000 budgeted and that
     the earned value of the project has already been calculated at $18,000. What is the EAC
     that she will communicate to Kip?
      A. $13,000
      B.   $17,000
      C.   $20,000
      D.   $15,000

 54. You are working in the Perform Integrated Change Control process. One of the activities
     you are involved in is documenting and storing the configuration management information
     needed to effectively manage product information and data associated with changes.
     Which of the following does this describe?
      A. Configuration identification
      B.   Configuration verification and auditing
      C.   Configuration verification and documentation
      D.   Configuration status accounting

 55. Which of the following statements best describes the purpose of the Control Schedule
     process?
      A. It identifies and documents specific actions to be performed to produce the project
         deliverables.
      B.   It estimates the number of work periods needed to complete individual activities with
           the estimated resources.
      C.   It monitors the status of the project to update the schedule and manage changes to the
           schedule baseline.
      D.   It analyzes activity sequence, duration, resource requirements, and constraints to
           create the schedule model.

 56. You're a project manager for Music On Demand, and you're in the Control Risks process.
     Your project, when completed, will provide a way for owners of smartphones to purchase
     music on demand from the recording company you work for and download it directly to
     their devices. Your testers are testing the download process now but discover that the name
     of the song and other textual information does not download properly. This technical
     deviation poses a risk to the project. Your developers are working on a solution and have
     assured you this isn't a showstopper. This is an example of which of the following?
      A. Technical performance analysis
      B.   Workaround
      C.   Periodic project risk reviews
      D.   Corrective action
                         Chapter 4      Monitoring and Controlling (Domain 4.0)               131



57. You are conducting the Perform Integrated Change Control process. You are using a
    software system that helps track change requests and the decisions regarding change
    requests by the CCB and that also helps manage the distribution of the decisions of the
    change board. Which tool and technique does this describe?
    A. Information management system
    B.   Change control tools
    C.   Records management system
    D.   Change control system

58. Which of the following is a valid tool or technique that aids the project manager in
    monitoring and controlling communications throughout the life of the project?
    A. Data representation
    B.   Communication methods
    C.   Communication skills
    D.   Communication technology

59. Who is responsible for managing changes within a project?
    A. Project sponsor
    B.   Everyone
    C.   Project manager
    D.   Risk manager

60. Control charts measure the results of processes over time and depict common causes of
    variances. Common causes of variances are a result of all of the following except
    which one?
    A. Random variances
    B.   Quantifiable variances
    C.   Predictable variances
    D.   Variances that are always present

61. A project manager is preparing to lead a project status meeting. The project is currently
    75 percent complete and is reaching the most critical point. Since the project sponsor is
    planning on attending the meeting, the project manager decides to update the earned
    value calculations to present the latest performance updates in terms that the sponsor will
    want to see. The budget at completion (BAC) is set at $550,000, and the current estimate
    at completion (EAC) is at $525,000. What variance at completion (VAC) value will the
    project manager communicate to the sponsor?
    A. 0.10
    B.   0.95
    C.   -25,000
    D.   25,000
132         Chapter 4      Monitoring and Controlling (Domain 4.0)



 62. You're a project manager for Music On Demand, and you're in the Monitor Risks process.
     Your project, when completed, will provide a way for owners of smartphones to purchase
     music on demand from the recording company you work for and download it directly to
     their devices. You are monitoring the risks on the project and have analyzed elements such
     as the risk audits, preventive actions, and corrective actions. This information might be
     reported in which of the following outputs of this process?
      A. Work performance reports
      B.   Work performance information
      C.   Work performance data
      D.   Project document updates

 63. Which of the following processes involves ensuring that all requirements of procurement
     agreements are met?
      A. Close Project or Phase
      B.   Plan Procurement Management
      C.   Conduct Procurements
      D.   Control Procurements

 64. You are in the Monitor Communications process. Your organization has taken on a large,
     complex, multiyear project. You are coming in as the new project manager (the old project
     manager left one day for lunch and never came back). After you've spent some time working
     on the project, you begin to realize that the project sponsor doesn't want to hear bad news.
     There is, unfortunately, some bad news related to the project, but you have a plan to get the
     project back on track. One of the other stakeholders on the project informed you that the
     sponsor had just told them that that the project was proceeding as planned and was on time
     and on budget. You've found that the stakeholders are not communicating with each other
     and that since you've started working on the project, there have been no regularly scheduled
     meetings with stakeholders. All of the following are true regarding this question except
     which one?
      A. Regular, timely status meetings will help prevent situations like this. Meetings, which
         include regularly scheduled status review meetings, are a tool and technique of this
         process.
      B.   Reporting templates and communication policies will help with the communication
           process. Templates and policies are part of the project communications input to this
           process.
      C.   The project manager is responsible for facilitating the status meetings and for
           providing honest, truthful information.
      D.   You may need status meetings with different groups of people for a project as complex
           as this one.
                          Chapter 4      Monitoring and Controlling (Domain 4.0)             133



65. Alyssa is a project manager tasked with managing an infrastructure project that will
    consolidate five data centers into one. Alyssa is in the process of determining whether
    communications-related artifacts and activities that she had earlier planned had the
    intended effect. She also recently launched a customer satisfaction survey to get feedback
    on how stakeholders feel things are progressing thus far within the project. What project
    management process is she performing?
    A. Manage Communications
    B.   Monitor Communications
    C.   Plan Communications Management
    D.   Monitor and Control Project Work

66. You work for Sergio's, a golf equipment manufacturer. Your organization is installing
    some new manufacturing equipment, and you are managing the project. Some risk events
    have come to fruition on the project, and as a result, change requests have been submitted.
    You are in the Monitor Risks process and know that all of the following are true regarding
    this question except for which one?
    A. Change requests may take the form of corrective actions in the Monitor Risks
       process, which is part of the Monitoring and Controlling process group.
    B.   Change requests will not take the form of preventive actions because you are in
         the Monitoring and Controlling process group and too far into the work of the
         project.
    C.   Change requests must be processed through the Perform Integrated Change Control
         process, which is also in the Monitoring and Controlling process group.
    D.   Change requests may take the form of workarounds in the Control Risks process,
         which is part of the Monitoring and Controlling process group.

67. Kaylee is a senior project manager for a fitness company that is developing a new franchise
    model. She has just finished overseeing the implementation of several planned risk
    responses. What activity is she likely to perform next?
    A. Risk review
    B.   Trend analysis
    C.   Technical performance analysis
    D.   Sensitivity analysis

68. You are the project manager for a large software development project. Your project is being
    performed under contract, and the project has just been canceled. Which of the following
    processes should document the level of completeness of the project?
    A. Close Project or Phase
    B.   Control Quality
    C.   Validate Scope
    D.   Perform Integrated Change Control
134         Chapter 4      Monitoring and Controlling (Domain 4.0)



 69. A project manager is preparing to lead a project status meeting later that afternoon.
     The project is currently 75 percent complete and is reaching the most critical point.
     Since the project sponsor is planning on attending the meeting, the project manager
     decides to update the earned value calculations to present the latest performance updates
     in terms that the sponsor will want to see. The budget at completion (BAC) is set at
     $550,000, and the current estimate at completion (EAC) is at $525,000. How is the
     project performing in terms of the budget?
      A. It is under the planned cost.
      B.   It is on the planned cost.
      C.   It is over the planned cost.
      D.   Insufficient information was provided.

 70. Your project is running behind schedule and over budget. You are performing the
     Control Schedule process and have made updates to the schedule baseline, the schedule
     management plan, and the cost baseline. Which output of this process are you using?
      A. Project management plan updates
      B.   Schedule forecasts
      C.   Project documents updates
      D.   Organizational process assets updates

 71. Diana is a project manager for a small technology startup. One of her first projects
     involves shifting data hosting from an on-premise solution to a cloud-based one. With
     work now fully underway, she begins generating status reports so that they can later be
     distributed to the project team and other relevant stakeholders. Which process group does
     this activity--creation of status reports--belong to?
      A. Planning
      B.   Executing
      C.   Monitoring and Controlling
      D.   Closing

 72. Yasmin is a senior project manager who has just taken on a project that will produce a
     new line of medical widgets for a Fortune 100 company. The entire industry is buzzing
     with excitement over this project, which is estimated to span three years and require an
     investment of $1.5 billion from the company. While executing the project work, Yasmin
     performs activities to verify that approved changes that have been implemented are
     complete, retested, and certified as correct. What project management process is Yasmin
     performing?
      A. Validate Scope
      B.   Control Quality
      C.   Manage Quality
      D.   Control Scope

 73. You are a project manager working on a project involving a new scientific discovery in
     conjunction with your local university. Because of some changes that were approved
     during the Monitoring and Controlling processes, you discover that the descriptions of
                           Chapter 4      Monitoring and Controlling (Domain 4.0)           135



    the deliverables that make up the final product of the project are no longer accurate or
    complete. Which of the following will you use to track the changes to the deliverables and
    ensure their descriptions are accurate and complete, and what process is this associated
    with?
    A. Scope change control system in Control Scope
    B.   Quality control system in Control Quality
    C.   Configuration management system in Perform Integrated Change Control
    D.   Change control system in Monitor Communications

74. While performing activities associated with controlling project and product scope, a
    project manager uncovers scope creep. What is scope creep?
    A. The uncontrolled expansion of project or product scope
    B.   The controlled expansion of project or product scope
    C.   A team member who causes constant issues within the project
    D.   The delivery of scope that is behind schedule and over costs

75. Given the following information, is the project schedule ahead of or behind what was
    planned for this period? EV = 95, PV = 85, AC = 100.
    A. Ahead, because the result of the variance formula is negative
    B.   Behind, because the result of the variance formula is negative
    C.   Ahead, because the result of the variance formula is positive
    D.   Behind, because the result of the variance formula is positive

76. A project manager is performing activities associated with controlling quality for his
    assigned project. What data representation tool can the project manager use to show the
    number of defects by source?
    A. Histogram
    B.   Scatter diagram
    C.   Control chart
    D.   Cause and effect diagram

77. You are a project manager working for Mail House King. Your company processes orders
    for several mail-order catalog companies. Your project is to install new mail-sorting
    equipment and software. You've had some problems and experienced some variances
    during the project. You expect these variances to continue throughout the life of the
    project and expect they will be similar to the variances you've seen so far. You know
    the following information: PV = 900, BAC = 1400, EV = 925, AC = 925. Which of the
    following is the correct ETC given the circumstances?
    A. 490
    B.   1400
    C.   475
    D.   500
136         Chapter 4      Monitoring and Controlling (Domain 4.0)



 78. While performing activities associated with controlling project and product scope, a
     project manager uncovers scope creep. What is the project manager likely to do next to
     take corrective action?
      A. Scold the individual(s) responsible
      B.   Update the scope baseline
      C.   Submit a change request and analyze the impact
      D.   Notify the project team

 79. You are using the critical chain method to construct your schedule, and there are variances
     in your critical path tasks. Which of the following is true?
      A. Your schedule is not at risk yet, but you should monitor both critical and noncritical
         path tasks for further delays or variances.
      B.   You should compare the amount of buffer needed to what's remaining to help assess if
           the schedule is on track.
      C.   You should use preventive actions to get the project back on track.
      D.   Delays to the noncritical path tasks won't cause any further issues for the critical
           path.

 80. Diana is a project manager for a small technology startup. One of her first projects
     involves shifting data hosting from an on-premise solution to a cloud-based one. With
     work now fully underway, she begins distributing status reports to the project team and
     other relevant stakeholders. Status reports are an example of what?
      A. Work performance information
      B.   Work performance reports
      C.   Work performance data
      D.   Work performance analysis

 81. Which of the following earned value calculations reflects the estimated difference in cost
     at the completion of the project?
      A. Estimate at completion
      B.   Budget at completion
      C.   Variance at completion
      D.   To complete performance index

 82. Given the following information, are project costs ahead or behind what was planned for
     this period? EV = 95, PV = 85, AC = 100.
      A. Ahead, because the result of the variance formula is negative
      B.   Behind, because the result of the variance formula is negative
      C.   Ahead, because the result of the variance formula is positive
      D.   Behind, because the result of the variance formula is positive
                          Chapter 4      Monitoring and Controlling (Domain 4.0)                137



83. You are the project manager for a construction company that is building a new city and
    county office building in your city. Your CCB recently approved a scope change. You
    know that scope change might come about as a result of all of the following except
    which one?
    A. Schedule revisions
    B.   Product scope change
    C.   Changes to the agreed-upon WBS
    D.   Changes to the project requirements

84. Yazzy is a junior project manager for a fitness company that is developing a new franchise
    model. She is currently working under the guidance of a senior project manager over her
    parent project, who asks that she calculate the expected costs to finish the remaining
    project work. The work is proceeding as planned. She determines that the EAC is $75,000,
    and the cumulative actual costs to date are $50,000. What will Yazzy communicate to the
    senior project manager?
    A. $25,000
    B.   -$25,000
    C.   $10,000
    D.   $15,000

85. You are using the tools and techniques of the Control Schedule process and know all of the
    following are true except for which one?
    A. Schedule variances are a key factor in monitoring and controlling project time.
    B.   Comparing actual dates to estimated or forecast dates is one way to determine
         schedule variances.
    C.   Delays to noncritical path activities will not cause schedule delays.
    D.   Delays to critical path tasks will always cause schedule delays.

86. You know that PV = 563, AC = 558, EV = 521, EAC = 560, and BAC = 600. What is VAC?
    A. 2
    B.   79
    C.   40
    D.   37

87. A project manager meets with a key set of experts within her project team. They express
    concerns over a recent scope change that was submitted by the customer, since the project
    is deep into the execution stages of the project life cycle. Which of the following is a valid
    tool or technique that can aid the project manager in addressing the team's concerns?
    A. Decision-making
    B.   Data analysis
    C.   Meetings
    D.   Change control tools
138         Chapter 4      Monitoring and Controlling (Domain 4.0)



 88. You are a project manager working on a project involving a new scientific discovery in
     conjunction with your local university. You are in the Monitoring and Controlling process
     group and are performing activities such as reporting and comparing actual project
     results against the project management plan; analyzing performance data; monitoring the
     project for risks to make certain they're identified and reported; documenting product
     information; gathering, recording, and documenting project information; and monitoring
     approved change requests. Which process are you performing?
      A. Monitor Communications
      B.   Perform Integrated Change Control
      C.   Monitor Risks
      D.   Monitor and Control Project Work

 89. You are a project manager and are meeting with your team. The goal of this meeting is to
     determine the source of defects recently found. Which of the following describes what you
     are doing?
      A. Performing an inspection
      B.   Performing an audit
      C.   Performing a what-if scenario analysis
      D.   Performing root-cause analysis

 90. You are asked to calculate TCPI using BAC for your current project. You know that PV =
     1750, AC = 1700, EV = 1680, BAC = 1800, EAC = 1820. What is the TCPI?
      A. 1.0
      B.   1.2
      C.   120
      D.   180

 91. You work for Rory's, a golf equipment manufacturer. Your organization is installing some
     new manufacturing equipment, and you are managing the project. Your project sponsor
     has asked for an EAC and has told you that he wants you to consider ETC work performed
     at the present CPI. If EV = 145, PV = 162, AC = 138, and BAC = 200, what is EAC?
      A. 190
      B.   61
      C.   58
      D.   196

 92. Your project has experienced some changes in performance, and some risks have occurred.
     EAC and BAC now differ as a result. Your project sponsor is asking for an estimate of the
     cost of the project at completion. Which of the following is true?
      A. BAC may no longer be reasonable given the changes in performance, so you should
         use EAC to forecast the cost at completion.
      B.   EAC may no longer be reasonable given the changes in performance, so you should
           use BAC to forecast the cost at completion.
                           Chapter 4      Monitoring and Controlling (Domain 4.0)             139



    C.   BAC may no longer be reasonable given the changes in performance, so you should
         use ETC to forecast the cost at completion.
    D.   EAC may no longer be reasonable given the changes in performance, so you should
         use ETC to forecast the cost at completion.

93. If earned value = 1700, planned value = 2000, and actual costs = 1950, what is the cost
    performance index (CPI)?
    A. 0.87
    B.   1.15
    C.   0.85
    D.   1.18

94. What action can the project manager take if the baselined project schedule is no longer
    achievable?
    A. Update the schedule with new targets
    B.   Evaluate options and submit a change request
    C.   Nothing, the project remains off track until closure
    D.   Inform the project sponsor

95. You are a project manager for Laurel's Theater Productions. You are comparing cost
    performance over time and are considering using variance analysis, trend analysis, or
    earned value performance. Which tool and technique does this refer to?
    A. Earned value management
    B.   Reserve analysis
    C.   Forecasting
    D.   Data analysis

96. You are the project manager for a software consulting firm that is developing a new
    software program for a customer in another country. Things seem to be progressing well.
    Recently, your stakeholders examined the work of the project and formally accepted the
    work results. Which process was just performed?
    A. Validate Scope
    B.   Manage Assurance
    C.   Close Project or Phase
    D.   Control Quality

97. You are the project manager for a project that will produce a mobile phone application
    that sends alerts when UV rays are at dangerous levels, alerting users to stay indoors. You
    are in the process of managing the schedule and use a chart to track the work that remains
    to be completed within the iteration backlog. What is this chart called?
    A. Velocity chart
    B.   Scrum chart
    C.   Iteration burndown chart
    D.   Iteration chart
140         Chapter 4       Monitoring and Controlling (Domain 4.0)



 98. You work for Rory's, a golf equipment manufacturer. Your organization is installing some
     new manufacturing equipment, and you are managing the project. Your project sponsor
     has asked for an EAC and has told you that he wants you to use ETC work considering
     CPI and SPI factors. If EV = 145, PV = 162, AC = 148, and BAC = 200, what is EAC?
      A. 63
      B.   207
      C.   58
      D.   210

 99. Reasons to Lyv is the top customer of a large marketing firm. Trudy is the president of
     Reasons to Lyv and has decided to launch a product that leverages new GPS tracking
     technology. She sits down with Roy, the project manager on the project, to review and
     evaluate whether a sufficient amount of funds remains to address known risks. What
     activity are they performing?
      A. Technical performance analysis
      B.   Audit
      C.   Reserve analysis
      D.   Risk review

100. Your project sponsor has asked for an EAC and has told you that he wants you to use ETC
     work considering CPI and SPI factors. You know that this formula assumes which of the
     following?
      A. There is a positive cost performance to date.
      B.   There is a negative cost performance to date, and the project schedule must be met.
      C.   The project schedule has slipped and must be corrected.
      D.   There is a positive cost performance to date, and the project schedule must be met.

101. Which project management process is responsible for determining whether the project
     outputs do what they were intended to do?
      A. Direct and Manage Project Work
      B.   Control Quality
      C.   Validate Scope
      D.   Manage Quality

102. A project manager spends the afternoon evaluating the impact of adding in two new
     features recently requested by the customer. The justification for the addition was high,
     although she could clearly see that it would increase costs by 75 percent. What process is
     the project manager performing?
      A. Develop Scope
      B.   Validate Scope
      C.   Perform Integrated Change Control
      D.   Control Scope
                          Chapter 4      Monitoring and Controlling (Domain 4.0)              141



103. Your project has come about because of a social need. You're calculating performance
     measurements and know the following information: BAC = 2400, ETC = 400, PV = 2200,
     EV = 2100, and AC = 2000. What are the CPI and SPI?
     A. CPI = 1.14 and SPI = .87
     B.   CPI = 1.05 and SPI =.95
     C.   CPI = .87 and SPI = 1.14
     D.   CPI = .95 and SPI = 1.05

104. If earned value = 1700, planned value = 2000, and actual costs = 1950, what is the
     schedule performance index (SPI)?
     A. 0.87
     B.   1.15
     C.   0.85
     D.   1.18

105. Dennis is a project manager working for a company that advertises a high degree of
     quality to their customers within the medical device industry. In his current assigned
     project, Dale is monitoring quality of the most critical deliverable that will be produced
     through his project. What technique can he use to ensure that the deliverable conforms to
     documented standards?
     A. Perform an audit
     B.   Perform a risk review
     C.   Perform an inspection
     D.   Perform a product evaluation

106. The first input listed in the following options is unique to the Monitor and Control Project
     Work process, and the second input listed is an input of the following processes: Manage
     Team, Manage Communications, Perform Integrated Change Control, Monitor Risks.
     A. Work performance information, work performance data
     B.   Work performance data, work performance information
     C.   Work performance reports, work performance data
     D.   Work performance information, work performance reports

107. All of the following are true regarding earned value analysis except for which one?
     A. A negative cost variance is good, meaning the project is under the planned cost.
     B.   A positive schedule variance means that the project is ahead of schedule.
     C.   A cost variance of zero means that the project is on the planned cost.
     D.   A schedule variance of zero means that the project is on schedule.

108. Which of the following is the only tool and technique of the Control Scope process?
     A. Requirements traceability matrix
     B.   Data analysis
     C.   Configuration management system
     D.   Project management software
142         Chapter 4      Monitoring and Controlling (Domain 4.0)



109. Your project has come about because of market demand. You're calculating performance
     measurements and know the following information: BAC = 2400, ETC = 400, PV = 2200,
     EV = 2100, and AC = 2000. What are the CV and SV?
      A. CV = -100 and SV = 100
      B.   CV = 300 and SV = 200
      C.   CV = 200 and SV = 300
      D.   CV = 100 and SV = -100

110. A project manager facilitates a meeting to provide updated information regarding the
     progress of the project. What type of meeting is this?
      A. Risk review meeting
      B.   Status review meeting
      C.   Planning meeting
      D.   Change control meeting

111. Yazzy is a junior project manager for a fitness company that is developing a new franchise
     model. She is currently working under the guidance of a senior project manager over
     her parent project, who asks that she provide an update on the efficiency that must be
     maintained to complete the project on plan. Yazzy knows the following information:
     BAC = 70,000, EV = 65,000, AC = 60,000. What will Yazzy communicate to the project
     manager?
      A. 0.50
      B.   2.0
      C.   1.08
      D.   1.17

112. These two processes in the Monitoring and Controlling process group are usually
     performed in parallel to assure correctness and acceptance of the work. Which two
     processes are concerned with correctness and acceptance, respectively?
      A. Control Quality and Control Scope
      B.   Validate Scope and Control Scope
      C.   Control Quality and Validate Scope
      D.   Control Quality and Perform Integrated Change Control

113. During a status meeting, the project manager informs the team that the project has spent
     a total of $7,500 to date and that the earned value is $5,000. How is the project currently
     performing?
      A. Under planned cost
      B.   On planned cost
                          Chapter 4      Monitoring and Controlling (Domain 4.0)               143



     C.   Over planned cost
     D.   Insufficient information provided

114. Data analysis is used to help determine the impact of schedule variations and whether
     corrective actions are needed. Which of the following measurements pertain to the project
     schedule?
     A. CPI, ETC
     B.   SP, CPI
     C.   CP, ETC
     D.   SV, SPI

115. Kaylee is a risk manager working in collaboration with Alyssa, a project manager, and
     both work for a top healthcare company. They are currently evaluating the effectiveness of
     the risk management processes. What tool and technique are they likely to use to carry out
     this activity?
     A. Risk review
     B.   Risk audit
     C.   Technique performance analysis
     D.   Reserve analysis

116. Which performance measurement estimates the expected total cost of a scheduled activity
     and is the most commonly used formula?
     A. AC + bottom-up ETC
     B.   AC + (BAC - EV)
     C.   Reestimate
     D.   EAC - AC

117. Which of the following best describes the purpose of the change log?
     A. It is used to document corrective action needed during a project.
     B.   It is used to document changes that occur during a project.
     C.   It is used to document preventive action needed during a project.
     D.   It is used to document defect repairs that are needed during a project.

118. The realized cost incurred for specific work performed on an activity is referred to as
     what?
     A. Earned value
     B.   Planned value
     C.   Actual cost
     D.   Budget at completion
144         Chapter 4      Monitoring and Controlling (Domain 4.0)



119. Your organization is experiencing a shake-up at the top levels of management. Your project
     team has expressed concerns that their project might be canceled because of the changes
     going on at the top. Thankfully, the new management team has decided to continue with
     the project. Before the shake-up happened, you were in the Monitoring and Controlling
     process group, and your next step was to check for correct work results to make certain
     they comply with the standards set out in the quality management plan. One of the results
     you've inspected measures 70 miles per hour. The quality management plan outlined
     standards between 65 and 75 miles per hour. Which of the following does this describe?
      A. Statistical sampling
      B.   Tolerable results
      C.   Inspection
      D.   Nonconformance

120. The output of the Monitor and Control Project Work process can take many forms,
     including issues or action item logs, status reports, project documents, dashboards, and
     more. Which output does this refer to?
      A. Work performance information
      B.   Work performance data
      C.   Work performance reports
      D.   Project documents updates

121. All of the following are true regarding the Perform Integrated Change Control process
     except for which one?
      A. This process is carried out as part of executing the project work.
      B.   This process is performed throughout the project life cycle.
      C.   This process addresses changes that encompass corrective actions, preventive actions,
           and defect repair.
      D.   This process belongs to the Project Integration Management Knowledge Area.

122. You work for Writer's Block, a service that reviews and critiques manuscripts for aspiring
     writers. You were assigned to be the project manager for a new computer system that
     logs, tracks, and saves submitted manuscripts along with the editor's notes. You hired and
     worked with a vendor who wrote the system from scratch to your specifications. You are
     reviewing a report regarding certain aspects of the project's performance, and one of the
     measurements on the report is the expected cost of the work when completed. Which of
     the following does this describe?
      A. AC
      B.   EV
      C.   ETC
      D.   EAC

123. Validate Scope is primarily concerned with what?
      A. Verification of scope changes
      B.   Correctness of the deliverables
                           Chapter 4      Monitoring and Controlling (Domain 4.0)                145



     C.   Acceptance of the deliverables
     D.   Validation of the planned scope

124. You are a project manager working for Mail House King. Your company processes orders
     for several mail-order catalog companies. Your project involves installing new mail-
     sorting equipment and software, and the project is progressing as expected so far. Your
     project sponsor has asked for an EAC. You ask your team members to help estimate a
     bottom-up ETC. You know the following information: BAC = 650, ETC = 75, EV = 625,
     AC = 650. Which of the following is the correct EAC given the circumstances?
     A. 675
     B.   677
     C.   725
     D.   700

125. A project manager is performing activities associated with monitoring and control scope
     of the project. What key information can they use in conjunction with the plan to help
     them get started?
     A. Project documents
     B.   Variance analysis
     C.   Trend analysis
     D.   Work performance data

126. Roshoud is the VP of customer operations for Galactic Kidz and is the project sponsor
     of the latest project, called Project G. He sits down with Sally, the project manager, to
     discuss resource utilization on the project. He expresses concern after recently hearing
     that resources have been unavailable as planned. Sally admits that this has been the case
     and that it has set the project back unexpectedly. What action should Sally take to remedy
     the situation?
     A. Review the schedule to identify what resource gaps currently exist within the project
     B.   Perform data analysis to determine what corrective action may be taken to get back
          on track with the plan
     C.   Procure additional resources to take the place of those that became unavailable after
          the project work began
     D.   Talk to the functional managers to ensure the unavailable resources receive poor
          performance reviews

127. A project manager is performing activities associated with monitoring and controlling
     the scope of the project. What tool and technique are they likely to use to carry out the
     process?
     A. Performance review
     B.   Data analysis
     C.   Variance analysis
     D.   Inspection
146         Chapter 4       Monitoring and Controlling (Domain 4.0)



128. You are going to calculate TCPI and know that BAC is no longer attainable. You know
     that PV = 1750, AC = 1700, EV = 1680, BAC = 1800, EAC = 1820. What is TCPI?
      A. 1.4
      B.   1.2
      C.   1.7
      D.   1.0

129. A good status review meeting uses which type of communication method?
      A. Push
      B.   Pull
      C.   Interactive
      D.   Public

130. You are in the Control Quality process and are using a control chart. All of the following
     are true regarding this tool except for which one?
      A. Common causes of variance include random, known, or predictable, and variances
         that are always present in the process and common causes of variance are plotted on a
         control chart.
      B.   Control charts measure variances to determine whether process variances are in
           control or out of control.
      C.   Common causes of variance that are outside of the acceptable range may require the
           project manager to approve changes to or reorganization of the process.
      D.   Control charts are used in conjunction with the Rule of 7.

131. What is the most commonly used method of performance measurement?
      A. Variance analysis
      B.   Trend analysis
      C.   Forecasting
      D.   Earned value management

132. The project sponsor emails the project manager urgently requesting the latest
     measurement of cumulative work performed, expressed in terms of the approved budget.
     The sponsor notes that they must have this information by end of day to prepare for a
     critical meeting the next morning. What information is the sponsor looking for?
      A. Earned value
      B.   Planned value
      C.   Actual cost
      D.   Budget at completion
                          Chapter 4      Monitoring and Controlling (Domain 4.0)            147



133. Assuming that work is progressing as planned, calculate estimate to complete (ETC) using
     the following values: BAC = 25,000; EV = 10,000; AC = 12,000. Calculate to the nearest
     whole number.
     A. Insufficient information provided
     B.   13,000
     C.   30,120
     D.   18,121

134. You work for Writer's Block, a service that reviews and critiques manuscripts for aspiring
     writers. You were assigned to be the project manager for a new computer system that
     logs, tracks, and saves submitted manuscripts along with the editor's notes. You hired and
     worked with a vendor who wrote the system from scratch to your specifications. You are
     reviewing a report regarding certain aspects of the project's performance, and one of the
     measurements on the report calculates the difference between the budget at completion
     and the estimate at completion. Which of the following does this describe?
     A. TCPI
     B.   VAC
     C.   ETC
     D.   EAC

135. You are in the process of evaluating the engagement levels of stakeholders. What tool can
     you use to help you get started quickly?
     A. Stakeholder assessment matrix
     B.   Alternatives analysis
     C.   Root cause analysis
     D.   Presentations

136. You are working on a project where all of the work of the project has been outsourced.
     Which of the following is the process you will use to monitor vendor performance,
     coordinate communications and interfaces among all the vendors, administer each of the
     contracts and procurement agreements, and manage all the due dates?
     A. Conduct Procurements
     B.   Control Procurements
     C.   Control Communications
     D.   Monitor and Control Project Work

137. This tool of the Control Quality process is used to help organize data when performing
     inspections and gathering information on defects. This information can also be displayed
     as a Pareto diagram.
     A. Run charts
     B.   Fishbone diagrams
     C.   Scatter diagrams
     D.   Check sheets
148         Chapter 4       Monitoring and Controlling (Domain 4.0)



138. All of the following statements are true regarding earned value management except which one?
      A. Earned value management monitors the PV, AC, and EV, which might result in
         corrective action.
      B.   Earned value management is a project integration method that monitors scope,
           schedule, and cost measurements, which might result in lessons learned for future
           projects.
      C.   Earned value management is a performance measurement analysis tool and technique
           of Control Costs, which might result in budget updates.
      D.   Earned value management monitors performance measurements, which might result
           in workarounds to correct problems.

139. Which of the following values refers to the value of the work planned to be completed?
      A. Earned value
      B.   Planned value
      C.   Actual cost
      D.   Budget at completion

140. If cumulative EV = 145, PV = 162, AC = 138, BAC = 200, and ETC = 62, what is ETC
     when you believe future cost variances will not be typical?
      A. 57.75
      B.   200
      C.   55
      D.   193

141. Earned value analysis, iteration burndown chart, performance reviews, trend analysis,
     variance analysis, and what-if scenario analysis are all types of what?
      A. Project management information systems
      B.   Data representation tools and techniques
      C.   Data analysis tools and techniques
      D.   Schedule compression tools and techniques

142. All of the following are key dimensions that are developed and monitored through earned
     value management for each work package and control account, except for which one?
      A. Budget value
      B.   Planned value
      C.   Earned value
      D.   Actual cost

143. Which tool within the data representation tools and techniques in the Control Quality
     process is sometimes used to show planned performance against actual performance?
      A. Run charts
      B.   Fishbone diagrams
      C.   Scatter diagrams
      D.   Check sheets
                           Chapter 4       Monitoring and Controlling (Domain 4.0)               149



144. Carina is a principal project manager of You've Got Dogs, a specialty company that
     creates custom dog apparel and toys. As part of her practice, she sits down with her
     sponsor to regularly evaluate how the project is performing. In their most recent meeting,
     they analyze whether sufficient contingency and manage reserves remain. What technique
     is Carina using?
     A. Forecasting
     B.   Reserve analysis
     C.   Earned value analysis
     D.   Trend analysis

145. Validate Scope and Control Scope are Project Scope Management processes that belong to
     which project management process group?
     A. Initiating
     B.   Planning
     C.   Executing
     D.   Monitoring and Controlling

146. You are calculating the expected total cost of the project at completion and are
     anticipating some significant changes and do not expect the work of the project to proceed
     as planned. If BAC = 400, EAC = 425, PV = 400, EV = 375, and AC = 85, what is the
     expected total cost at completion?
     A. 340
     B.   Re-estimate
     C.   25
     D.   27

147. This tool and technique of the Monitor Risks process is used to examine the
     implementation of risk response plans and examine their effectiveness at dealing with risks
     and their root causes.
     A. Audits
     B.   Risk reassessment
     C.   Variance and trend analysis
     D.   Reserve analysis

148. All of the following are true regarding the Monitor Communications process except for
     which one?
     A. It is the third and final process of the Project Communications Management
        Knowledge Area.
     B.   It is the process that ensures timely and appropriate collection, creation, distribution,
          and storage of project information.
     C.   It relies on project work performance data and the plan to generate work performance
          information.
     D.   It may generate change requests to adjust communications activities as a way of
          ensuring they are producing the desired results.
150         Chapter 4       Monitoring and Controlling (Domain 4.0)



149. All of the following are true regarding the Monitor Risks process except for which one?
      A. It involves the development of risk responses.
      B.   It is the only risk management process belonging to the Monitor and Control process
           group.
      C.   It involves performing risk reviews and risk audits.
      D.   It generates updates to the risk register.

150. A project with a cost performance index (CPI) of 1.12 and a schedule performance index
     (SPI) of 0.90 is performing:
      A. Under budget and ahead of schedule
      B.   Over budget and behind schedule
      C.   Under budget and behind schedule
      D.   Over budget and ahead of schedule

151. You are working on a project where all of the work of the project has been outsourced.
     You are monitoring vendor performance, coordinating communications and interfaces
     among all the vendors, administering each of the contracts and procurement agreements,
     and managing all the due dates. The information you gather regarding these activities is
     collected as part of which of the following outputs and its associated process?
      A. Work performance data, Direct and Manage Project Work
      B.   Work performance reports, Monitor and Control Project Work
      C.   Work performance information, Control Procurements
      D.   Work performance reports, Conduct Procurements

152. Using the following values, calculate the schedule performance index (SPI): EV = 4,000,
     PV = 3,500, AC = 5,500.
      A. 0.88
      B.   1.14
      C.   0.73
      D.   1.38

153. Which project management process is responsible for formal acceptance of deliverables?
      A. Control Scope
      B.   Validate Scope
      C.   Control Quality
      D.   Manage Quality

154. You are a project manager for Community Trends, a nonprofit organization. Your project
     has come about because of a social need. You're calculating performance measurements,
     and you know the following information: BAC = 900, ETC = 65, PV = 500, EV = 475, and
     AC = 425. Which of the following statements is true?
      A. This project is ahead of schedule, and costs are higher than planned.
      B.   This project is behind schedule, and costs are higher than planned.
                            Chapter 4      Monitoring and Controlling (Domain 4.0)           151



     C.   This project is behind schedule, but costs are lower than planned.
     D.   This project is ahead of schedule, and costs are lower than planned.

155. LaFawnduh is a project manager working for Dancing Apron, a company that combines
     cooking with simple children's cooking recipes and music. Her latest project involves
     the release of the company's first digital product that parents will be able to purchase
     and download online. While overseeing the project, LaFawnduh notices that recent
     stakeholder engagement levels have dropped significantly, and they've begun to disagree
     during status meetings. What key information can she use to help her deal with the
     situation?
     A. Project management plan
     B.   Work performance data
     C.   Interpersonal and team skills
     D.   Decision-making

156. David is a project manager working for a prominent book publishing company. As the
     most senior project manager within the organization, he often gets the most complex
     project assignments. As part of his current project, he oversees the inspection of
     deliverables, measuring them against documented requirements and acceptance criteria.
     Inspections are also known by all of the following names, except for which one?
     A. Walk-throughs
     B.   Product reviews
     C.   Audits
     D.   Reviews

157. You work for Writer's Block, a service that reviews and critiques manuscripts for aspiring
     writers. You were assigned to be the project manager for a new computer system that
     logs, tracks, and saves submitted manuscripts along with the editor's notes. You hired and
     worked with a vendor who wrote the system from scratch to your specifications. You are
     monitoring risks and determining whether their consequences still have the same impact
     on the project objectives as they did when you were performing the risk processes during
     the Planning process group. Which of the following does this describe?
     A. Risk audits
     B.   Data analysis
     C.   Risk probability and impact assessment
     D.   Risk urgency assessment

158. A project manager is carrying out activities associated with the Monitor Stakeholder
     Engagement process. What result will these activities produce?
     A. Decision-making
     B.   Work performance information
     C.   Interpersonal and team skills
     D.   Stakeholder engagement plan
152         Chapter 4      Monitoring and Controlling (Domain 4.0)



159. Alyssa is a project manager tasked with managing an infrastructure project that will
     consolidate five data centers into one. She updates a stakeholder engagement matrix that
     she created at the start of the project to document the communication needs of the project.
     What tool or technique is Alyssa using?
      A. Project management information system
      B.   Interpersonal and team skills
      C.   Expert judgment
      D.   Data representation

160. You are working on a project where all of the work of the project has been outsourced.
     You are in the Control Procurements process and know that each of the following options
     is correct regarding seller invoices except for which one?
      A. They describe the work that was completed or the materials that were delivered.
      B.   They should include any supporting documentation necessary to describe what was
           delivered.
      C.   They are an input to this process, and the invoices are processed using the payment
           systems output.
      D.   This is one method that vendors use to request payment for goods or services.
Chapter   Closing (Domain 5.0)

 5        The Project Management
          Professional (PMP)(R) exam content
          from the Closing the Project
          performance domain covered
          in this chapter includes the
          following:

           Obtain final acceptance of the project deliverables from
           relevant stakeholders in order to confirm that project
           scope and deliverables were achieved.

           Transfer the ownership of deliverables to the assigned
           stakeholders in accordance with the project plan in order
           to facilitate project closure.

           Obtain financial, legal, and administrative closure using
           generally accepted practices and policies in order to
           communicate formal project closure and ensure transfer
           of liability.

           Prepare and share the final project report according to the
           communications management plan in order to document
           and convey project performance and assist in project
           evaluation.

           Collate lessons learned that were documented
           throughout the project and conduct a comprehensive
           project review in order to update the organization's
           knowledge base.

           Archive project documents and materials using generally
           accepted practices in order to comply with statutory
           requirements and for potential use in future projects and
           audits.

           Obtain feedback from relevant stakeholders using
           appropriate tools and techniques and based on the
           stakeholder management plan in order to evaluate their
           satisfaction.
The process names, inputs, tools and techniques,
outputs, and descriptions of the project
management process groups and related materials
and figures in this chapter are based on content
from A Guide to the Project Management Body
of Knowledge (PMBOK (R) Guide), Sixth Edition
(PMI(R), 2017).
                                                Chapter 5      Closing (Domain 5.0)            155



1. Which of the following statements best describes a project that has ended because of addition?
   A. A project that evolves into ongoing operations
   B.   A project that no longer has access to the required resources
   C.   A project whose resources are distributed to other areas in the organization
   D.   A project that is completed and accepted by the stakeholders
2. What type of organization experiences the least amount of stress during project closeout?
   A. Project-oriented
   B.   Functional
   C.   Weak matrix
   D.   Strong matrix
3. Which of the following is a valid output of the Close Project or Phase process that includes
   archiving project or phase closure documents?
   A. Project management plan updates
   B.   Organizational process assets updates
   C.   Project documents updates
   D.   Enterprise environmental factors updates
4. Cheryl is a procurement manager assigned to a project that implemented a new system
   patching service. Although she experienced a multitude of issues with the vendor, the
   project manager and sponsor decide to accept the vendor's result, and she then provides
   the vendor with formal written notice that the contract has been completed. What output
   has just been generated?
   A. Final report
   B.   Closed procurements
   C.   Change request
   D.   Procurement documentation updates
5. What is the ethical code you'll be required to adhere to as a PMP credential holder?
   A. Code of Professional Conduct
   B.   Code of Project Management Professional Standards and Ethics
   C.   Code of Professional Ethics
   D.   Code of Ethics and Professional Conduct
6. Sue is the head of an enterprise project management office (PMO). She calls her team of
   project managers together for an urgent ad hoc staff meeting. During the meeting, she
   expresses concern over the results of a recent audit she conducted of projects that have
   closed over the past quarter. As part of her audit findings, she shares that most project
   managers missed transitioning ongoing activities to operations and that documentation
   had not been fully archived. What key process are project managers skipping?
   A. Perform Integrated Change Control
   B.   Close Project or Phase
   C.   Monitor and Control Project Work
   D.   Control Quality
156         Chapter 5       Closing (Domain 5.0)



  7. Sally and Joe are two project managers working in the corporate offices of a popular fast
     food franchise. They are both studying for their PMP certification, and as usual, they
     debate the latest topic on the agenda. Joe insists that when a project ends because of a lack
     of resources, this is referred to as starvation, whereas Sally insists that it is referred to as
     integration. Who is correct?
      A. Sally
      B.   Joe
      C.   Neither
      D.   Both

  8. All of the following represent values addressed in the Code of Ethics and Professional
     Conduct, except for which one?
      A. Honor
      B.   Responsibility
      C.   Fairness
      D.   Respect

  9. David is a project manager working for a prominent book publishing company. As the
     most senior project manager within the organization, he often gets paired with strong-
     willed project sponsors. During a recent project meeting, David's project sponsor began
     yelling in frustration at the project's status, which was blocked because of a critical
     resource being out ill. In frustration, the sponsor began spewing profanities at David,
     questioning his ability to manage effectively. In response, David calmly assured the project
     sponsor that a contingency plan would be implemented and requested that they speak
     privately to address his frustrations. David then excused the rest of the project team. What
     core value did David uphold during the meeting?
      A. Fairness
      B.   Honesty
      C.   Respect
      D.   Responsibility

 10. All of the following are true regarding project life cycles except for which one?
      A. Predictive life cycles take advantage of things that are unknown and unproven.
      B.   Iterative, incremental, Agile, and predictive are all types of project life cycles.
      C.   Agile life cycles leverage both iterative and incremental characteristics.
      D.   Iterative life cycles allow feedback on partially completed work to improve the work.

 11. At which point are project resources released?
      A. At the end of contract closure
      B.   At the end of the resource management processes
      C.   At the conclusion of the project
      D.   After their work is complete
                                                Chapter 5      Closing (Domain 5.0)             157



12. All of the following statements are true of the Close Project or Phase process except for
    which one?
    A. Probability for success is greatest in the Close Project or Phase processes.
    B.   The project manager's influence is greatest in the Close Project or Phase processes.
    C.   The stakeholders' influence is least in the Close Project or Phase processes.
    D.   Risk is greatest in the Close Project or Phase processes.

13. You are the project manager for a construction company that is building a new city and
    county office building in your city. Your change control board recently approved a scope
    change based on analysis that you provided. You recently learned that the analysis was
    flawed. Bringing the change control board back together to reevaluate the change request
    would set the project back by one month. What should you do?
    A. Since a decision has already been made, there is nothing that can be done.
    B.   Overturn the change immediately; flawed analysis should not be considered, and the
         change request should be rejected.
    C.   Do nothing; setting the project back by a month would be detrimental to the
         project.
    D.   Bring the error to the attention of the change control board, and follow the process of
         reevaluating the change request.

14. As a value upheld by the project management community, honesty entails which of the
    following?
    A. Ensuring integrity
    B.   Truthful reporting
    C.   Reporting ethics violations
    D.   Avoiding conflict of interest

15. You've recently begun to suspect your friend, a fellow PMP credential holder, might be
    accepting gifts from hardware vendors who are bidding on an upcoming multimillion-
    dollar project that she's going to manage. She has a new LED flat-screen computer monitor
    at her desk, she showed off her new electronic tablet at a meeting two days ago, and today
    she unpacked a new ultra-thin laptop while you were in her office. Which of the following
    should you do?
    A. You tell your friend these gifts probably aren't appropriate and leave it at that.
    B.   You and your friend have a long conversation about the items she's received, and she
         decides to return them and not accept any more items from vendors in the future.
    C.   You tell your friend you're concerned about the appearance of impropriety because of
         all the new things she's purchased lately, so you ask her directly whether these items
         were gifts from the vendor or whether she purchased them herself.
    D.   You know this is a conflict-of-interest situation, and it violates the Code of Ethics
         and Professional Conduct. You report your friend so that an investigation can take
         place.
158         Chapter 5      Closing (Domain 5.0)



 16. Which of the following values represents taking ownership for the decisions you make or
     fail to make, the actions you take or fail to take, and the consequences that result?
      A. Responsibility
      B.   Fairness
      C.   Respect
      D.   Honesty

 17. All of the following are true regarding the Close Project or Phase process except for
     which one?
      A. It is part of the Closing process group.
      B.   It belongs to the Project Scope Management Knowledge Area.
      C.   It generates a final report summarizing project performance.
      D.   It is where the transition of the final product, service, or result occurs.

 18. Which of the following project management Knowledge Areas addresses closure
     activities?
      A. Project Scope Management
      B.   Project Communications Management
      C.   Project Resource Management
      D.   Project Integration Management

 19. Nicolas is the project manager of a project that has been described as revolutionizing the
     mobile fitness tracking industry. He prepares for a meeting with the project's sponsor
     to discuss how to approach the project. During the meeting, he tells the project sponsor
     that he would like to promote self-awareness, listening, and coaching versus controlling.
     Nicolas is promoting characteristics of what?
      A. Servant leadership approach
      B.   Incremental approach
      C.   Deming approach
      D.   Hygiene model

 20. You learn that a trusted colleague has falsely reported that they earned their PMP
     credential. This was a requirement for earning their bonus for the end-of-fiscal-year
     rewards. What should you do?
      A. Report your colleague immediately to the appropriate management.
      B.   Tell another trusted colleague and hope that they will report it to management so that
           you don't need to violate their trust.
      C.   Do nothing. It is your colleague's business, and you should stay out of it.
      D.   Talk to your colleague and give them an opportunity to correct their behavior and be
           truthful.
                                                   Chapter 5      Closing (Domain 5.0)         159



21. Alfred is a senior project manager with 15 years of hands-on experience managing projects
    within the information technology space. After having been laid off because of budgetary
    cuts, Alfred begins perusing job postings on a career website. One posting in particular
    catches his eye. The position is for a security project manager within his favorite online
    retail brand. The position notes that applicants should have an active PMP and Security+
    certification, neither of which he has. He briefly considers submitting his application
    and claiming that he has the credentials, confident that he could earn both during the
    interview process. What should Alfred do?
    A. Update his resume with the two credentials since they likely do not perform a
       verification of the credentials
    B.   Peruse his network to identify whether he knows someone in the company who could
         tell him whether they verify
    C.   Update his resume with the two credentials and submit his application while
         concurrently pursuing the two credentials
    D.   Contact the recruiter to determine whether the credentials are a requirement before
         submitting his application

22. You are a project manager working in a foreign country. You observe that some of your
    project team members are having a difficult time adjusting to their new environment.
    You provided them with training on cultural differences and the customs of this country
    before arriving, but they still seem uncomfortable and disoriented. Which of the following
    statements is true?
    A. This is the result of working with teams of people from two different countries.
    B.   This condition comes about when working in an unfamiliar environment or culture
         and is called culture shock.
    C.   This is the result of jet lag and travel fatigue.
    D.   This condition is best resolved by providing diversity training to the team.

23. All of the following are true regarding honesty as a value project managers should uphold,
    except for which one?
    A. Personal gain should never be a factor in any project decision.
    B.   Honesty can include reporting the truth regarding project status.
    C.   Honesty only involves information regarding your own background and experience.
    D.   Honesty includes being honest about your own experience, not deceiving others, and
         not making false statements.

24. You are the project manager for a high-profile, critical project for your organization. You
    recently learn that the customer of your project has downsized, and as a result, the project
    funds have been cut. What type of project ending is this?
    A. Extinction
    B.   Integration
    C.   Starvation
    D.   Addition
160         Chapter 5       Closing (Domain 5.0)



 25. A project manager is managing a project that will consist of a single delivery with fixed
     requirements. What project life cycle is the project manager using?
      A. Iterative
      B.   Incremental
      C.   Predictive
      D.   Agile

 26. At minimum, measuring stakeholder satisfaction typically occurs at what point of the
     project life cycle?
      A. During project initiation
      B.   During project planning
      C.   During project execution
      D.   During project closure

 27. You are a project manager working on an international project. Your project involves
     building a factory in a foreign country that will produce chemical products to be used in
     the country's agricultural industry. Because of the scarcity of resources in this country,
     you've had to substitute one of the ingredients in the primary chemical product the factory
     produces. Initial tests show that the combination of ingredients in this particular product
     can cause sickness to those who handle the product without protective gloves and masks.
     However, the incidence of sickness is minor and is usually experienced only by those who
     are elderly or are experiencing another illness when handling the material. Which of the
     following is the most appropriate next step?
      A. Inform the foreign officials of the problem and that you are conducting an
         examination of the production process and the combination of the chemical
         ingredients to determine the extent of the problem.
      B.   Inform foreign officials that there is no problem except for the elderly or sick, who
           should wear masks when handling the materials.
      C.   Hold training for the foreign officials to show them the advances the company has
           made in technology, chemical engineering, and agricultural procedures.
      D.   Since the incidence of sickness is so small, risks are extremely low, and no action is
           needed.

 28. During a project status meeting, you request updates to work tasks. One of your close
     friends accountable for the most critical milestone on the schedule notes that they are
     on track. Over wine the previous evening, the friend had confided that the task was two
     weeks behind schedule. What should you do as the project manager?
      A. Throw your friend under the bus--after all, the wine was cheap and not worth it.
      B.   Immediately report the slip, along with the source of your information.
      C.   Give your friend an opportunity to report accurate status; if this does not occur,
           report accurately that a slippage has occurred.
      D.   Do nothing. Honoring friendship is far more important, and this is an opportunity to
           display trust.
                                                Chapter 5       Closing (Domain 5.0)         161



29. Which of the following characteristics do all project life cycles share?
    A. Degree of uncertainty
    B.   Degree of planning
    C.   Degree of unfinished work
    D.   Degree of work sequencing

30. Roshoud is the VP of customer operations for Galactic Kidz and is the project sponsor
    of Project G. He sits down with Sally, the project manager, to review the summary of the
    project's performance. The project is now in its final stages, and Sally has been focused
    on administrative closure activities. What project management document are they
    reviewing?
    A. Project management plan
    B.   Milestone list
    C.   Final report
    D.   Work performance report

31. Yasmin is a senior project manager for a project that aims to produce a new line of
    medical widgets for a Fortune 100 company. The entire industry has been buzzing with
    excitement over this project, which was estimated to span three years and require an
    investment of $1.5 billion from the company. While wrapping up for the week, Yasmin
    receives a fifth call from a vendor that has been pursuing an active RFP for the project.
    The vendor notes that they have connections in the offshore company by which the
    product will be manufactured, and if they win the contract, they are certain that they
    could bypass customs, saving Yasmin's company millions of dollars in the process. What
    should Yasmin do?
    A. Agree to discuss options with the vendor, since it would save the company millions of
       dollars
    B.   Pass on the offer but take down the vendor's phone number to keep options open
    C.   Pass on the offer and report the conversation to the company's legal department
    D.   Pass on the offer and report the conversation to her colleagues

32. You are in the Closing process group and are determining whether the work of the project
    is accurate and satisfactory and ensuring it is in accordance with the contract terms. This
    is known as which of the following?
    A. Product verification
    B.   Documentation of the product of the project
    C.   Verifying product scope
    D.   Inspection
162         Chapter 5       Closing (Domain 5.0)



 33. Sue is the head of an enterprise project management office (PMO). She delivers a
     presentation at the annual company meeting to describe her roles and responsibilities
     and the value of the PMO. As part of her presentation, she notes that, as practitioners,
     project managers should abide by four core values. In particular, Sue notes that project
     managers should avoid conflicts of interest. Which core value addresses conflict of
     interest?
      A. Responsibility
      B.   Fairness
      C.   Respect
      D.   Honesty

 34. You are managing a project on contract. Your bonus is contingent on the timely
     completion of the project. The project is behind schedule, but the remaining tasks are
     easy to complete and won't take more than a week. Which of the following is the most
     appropriate response?
      A. Invoice the customer for the full amount of the contract at the originally scheduled
         completion date.
      B.   Invoice the customer for the amount of work as of the actual project completion date.
      C.   Submit an invoice and complete the remaining tasks while the payment request is
           being processed because the work will be finished before the payment is made.
      D.   Tell the customer about the delay and negotiate a change to the schedule and/or
           invoice payment date and then bill for the full amount when the work is completed.

 35. As a project manager, balancing stakeholder interests and competing needs is an ongoing
     activity. All of the following make up the triple constraints except for which one?
      A. Quality
      B.   Time
      C.   Cost
      D.   Scope

 36. An iterative life cycle contains all of the following characteristics, except for which one?
      A. Activities are performed once for a given increment.
      B.   Requirements are dynamic.
      C.   The goal is corrective of the solution.
      D.   It produces a single delivery.

 37. Renee is managing a project with speed as the primary goal. What project life cycle is
     Renee likely using?
      A. Predictive project life cycle
      B.   Iterative project life cycle
      C.   Agile project life cycle
      D.   Incremental project life cycle
                                                Chapter 5      Closing (Domain 5.0)              163



38. Your colleague has reported to their manager that they passed their PMP certification
    exam. You know this is inaccurate, since you both took your exams at the same time and
    the colleague shared the results with you. What should you do?
    A. Give them an opportunity to correct their behavior and report them to PMI if they do not.
    B.   Don't say anything. Since this is your friend, the code states that you must look out
         for each other.
    C.   Give your friend a difficult time to teach them a lesson and disassociate with them.
    D.   Tell their manager immediately and report the violation to PMI directly.

39. Which of the following is a valid tool or technique that aids the project manager in
    improving performance on future projects by analyzing the interrelationships between
    project variables that contributed to project outcomes?
    A. Variance analysis
    B.   Regression analysis
    C.   Trend analysis
    D.   Document analysis

40. A project manager works with the project team to identify lessons learned. The
    information captured will then be archived and summarized within the project's final
    report. What activity is the project team engaged in?
    A. Updating the lessons learned register
    B.   Administrative closure
    C.   Conducting a project meeting
    D.   Capturing work performance information

41. Yasmin is a senior project manager for a project that aims to produce a new line of
    medical widgets for a Fortune 100 company. The entire industry has been buzzing with
    excitement over this project, which was estimated to span three years and require an
    investment of $1.5 billion from the company. Yasmin recently learned that her project
    would be placed on hold for the foreseeable future after a lawsuit against the company
    resulted in shareholders pulling out their investments, thereby liquidating capital needed to
    continue with the project. What type of project ending is this?
    A. Integration
    B.   Starvation
    C.   Addition
    D.   Extinction

42. You are the project manager for a large software development project. Your project
    was performed under contract, and the project is complete. You know that the closed
    procurement output encompasses which of the following elements?
    A. Formal written notice to the seller that the contract has been completed
    B.   Archive of all procurement-related documents generated through the project
    C.   Project records, project closure procedures, and procurement files
    D.   Recap of verbal agreement that the agreement has been satisfied
164         Chapter 5      Closing (Domain 5.0)



 43. Who is responsible for engaging in project closure activities?
      A. Project stakeholders
      B.   Project sponsor
      C.   Project manager
      D.   Risk manager

 44. Which of the following statements is true?
      A. All projects meet their objectives.
      B.   All projects come to an end.
      C.   All projects experience ending by integration.
      D.   All projects evolve into ongoing operations.

 45. You've just accepted a new project management assignment. The project is for a customer
     in a foreign country. You've requested a business analyst and two other project team
     members from the country the customer resides in to participate on your team. The
     remaining team members are from your country. You know that the best way to ensure
     that the project team doesn't get bogged down in cultural differences and hold up project
     progress is to do which of the following?
      A. Perform team-building exercises using videoconferencing to allow team members to
         get to know each other and get to the performing stage of team development as soon
         as possible.
      B.   Require project team members to read and sign the organization's diversity policy.
      C.   Establish your role as project manager as the first order of business and require
           compliance with company policies.
      D.   Provide diversity training for all the team members to make them aware of cultural
           differences and teach them to function effectively as a team despite these differences.

 46. Sue is the head of an enterprise project management office (PMO). During a private
     meeting with one of her project managers, she expresses her disappointment after learning
     that the project manager had falsely noted on their resume that they were a certified
     project management professional (PMP). Which core value did the project manager fail to
     abide by?
      A. Responsibility
      B.   Fairness
      C.   Respect
      D.   Honesty

 47. Charles works for a prominent company within the entertainment industry as head project
     manager. He recently learned that a highly confidential movie deal under negotiation
     may feature his wife's favorite actress. Despite the confidentiality agreement he signed, he
     decides to reveal the information, knowing that she will keep it to herself. What core value
     upheld by project managers has Charles violated?
      A. Honesty
      B.   Respect
                                                 Chapter 5      Closing (Domain 5.0)              165



    C.   Honor
    D.   Responsibility

48. Stakeholders have the greatest level of influence during which stage of the project's life
    cycle?
    A. During project initiation
    B.   During project planning
    C.   During project execution
    D.   During project closure

49. All of the following are Agile and Lean frameworks except for which one?
    A. Scrumban
    B.   Extreme Programming
    C.   Waterfall
    D.   Crystal Methods

50. Your colleague recently accepted a job transfer that requires a PMP credential. During a
    recent conversation, he confided to you that he lied on his application in order to get the
    assignment. This is an example of what?
    A. A bad friend
    B.   Poor judgment
    C.   An ethics violation
    D.   Unprofessional behavior

51. All of the following are common roles used in Agile projects except for which one?
    A. Cross-functional team member
    B.   Project manager
    C.   Product owner
    D.   Team facilitator

52. You are a project manager for Snow Fun, a chain of retail shops specializing in winter
    sports gear and clothing. You've been working on contract with Snow Fun and are ready
    to move on to your next assignment. The customer has signed off on the project, formal
    acceptance notices have been distributed, and project closure procedures have been
    performed. What type of project ending is this?
    A. Starvation
    B.   Extinction
    C.   Integration
    D.   Addition
166         Chapter 5      Closing (Domain 5.0)



 53. All of the following are true regarding the Close Project or Phase process except for
     which one?
      A. The process is performed once at the end of the project's life cycle.
      B.   The process belongs to the Project Integration Management Knowledge Area.
      C.   It is the only process belonging to the Closing process group.
      D.   It is responsible for producing the project's final report.

 54. A project manager has just begun working on activities to close out the project. One of
     the most influential functional leads associated with the project calls the project manager
     and begins insisting that a new scope of work be added. The project manager insists that
     the agreed-upon scope of the project has been completed and accepted and that a separate
     project will need to be initiated to complete the new scope identified. What is the likely
     outcome of this scenario?
      A. The new scope of work will be approved through the change control board.
      B.   The new scope of work will be approved by the project sponsor.
      C.   The new scope of work will be rejected by the change control board.
      D.   The new scope of work will be rejected by the project sponsor.

 55. Which of the following best describes the servant leadership approach used in Agile
     projects?
      A. The practice of one individual directing the team to provide clear and concise
         direction
      B.   The practice of generating work through iterations, with one leader clearly prominent
      C.   The practice of installing one clear leader, with team members serving as followers
      D.   The practice of focusing on understanding and addressing the needs and development
           of team members

 56. One of your team members, a fellow PMP credential holder, is under investigation for
     violation of the Code of Ethics and Professional Conduct. What action should you take?
      A. Cooperate fully with the investigation.
      B.   Tell the PMI investigator it would be a conflict of interest for you to cooperate in the
           investigation because this person is your team member.
      C.   Tell the PMI investigator it would be a conflict of interest for you to cooperate
           because they might uncover information about you during the investigation that could
           cause them to investigate you.
      D.   Cooperate with the PMI investigator by truthfully answering all their questions, but
           refuse to give them any written documentation.

 57. All of the following are true regarding project endings except for which one?
      A. Integration and starvation are two of the four types of project endings.
      B.   All work should cease immediately when a project ends prematurely.
                                                   Chapter 5      Closing (Domain 5.0)          167



    C.   Closure activities should be performed in all cases, including cancelled projects.
    D.   A project that achieves its objectives and is accepted by stakeholders ends through
         extinction.

58. A project manager is preparing to send five engineers to Japan to install a high-security
    network. The engineers have never been outside of the United States before. Prior to
    their travel, the project manager asks the Japan-based manager to give the engineers
    an overview of their history, customs, and social norms. What is the project manager's
    motive?
    A. Teach the engineers about the Japanese culture
    B.   Take a breather after a hard day's work
    C.   Ensure the engineers understand how to interact abroad
    D.   Prevent culture shock

59. A project manager has been reassigned to another project after her previous project
    evolved to ongoing operations. What type of project ending did she experience?
    A. Addition
    B.   Extinction
    C.   Starvation
    D.   Integration

60. All of the following are examples of a project that has ended because of starvation, except
    for which one?
    A. Resources are reassigned to other projects.
    B.   A key resource quits.
    C.   The project budget is reduced.
    D.   The customer curtails an order.

61. A project manager working under contract for an enterprise project management office
    contributes to the creation of a project management handbook as part of his assignment.
    At the conclusion of the project, he decides to sell and market the handbook under his
    consulting group's brand, even though he was one of many contributors acting as agents
    of the organization. He reasoned that his contribution to the creation of the handbook
    afforded him this right. How are his actions likely to be viewed by the contracting
    organization?
    A. As acting on his rights as a content contributor
    B.   As a violation of intellectual property
    C.   As a collaborator, given his contributions to the work
    D.   As operating against his agreement
168         Chapter 5        Closing (Domain 5.0)



 62. You are a project manager for Snow Fun, a chain of retail shops specializing in winter
     sports gear and clothing. You've been working on contract with Snow Fun and are ready
     to move on to your next assignment. As the project manager, you know all of the following
     statements are true regarding the Closing process group except which one?
      A. The Close Project or Phase process is where the project manager verifies that all the
         exit criteria have been met.
      B.   The Closing process is the most commonly skipped process.
      C.   Both the Close Project or Phase and Control Procurements processes verify that the
           work and product of the project were completed satisfactorily.
      D.   Control Procurements is the only process needed to perform contract closure if the
           project is completed on contract.

 63. A project manager is in the process of performing closure activities for a project. What
     input can they use to review the project success criteria and sign-off requirements for
     the project?
      A. Project management plan
      B.   Benefits management plan
      C.   Project charter
      D.   Project scope statement

 64. At which stage of the project does project spending taper off?
      A. Planning
      B.   Executing
      C.   Monitoring and Closing
      D.   Closing

 65. A project team that is attempting to adopt an Agile mind-set may use all of the following
     questions to develop an implementation strategy, except for which one?
      A. What work can be avoided to focus on high-priority items?
      B.   How can the team act in a predictable manner?
      C.   What work can the team deliver rapidly to obtain early feedback?
      D.   How can a servant-leadership approach aid the achievement of goals?

 66. You are a project manager working on contract. As your project comes to a close, your
     contract completes, and you find yourself out of work. What type of organizational
     structure did you work in?
      A. Strong matrix
      B.   Project-oriented
      C.   Functional
      D.   Weak matrix
                                                Chapter 5      Closing (Domain 5.0)            169



67. Diana is a newly appointed project manager. As part of onboarding to the new team, she
    shadows Charlie, a senior project manager. During a team meeting, she witnesses Charlie
    using several profanities when engaging with one engineer in particular. She cringes in
    her seat as she sees Charlie talk over the engineer and chastise him for challenging the
    schedule. Although new to the team, Diana decides to report Charlie's behavior to her
    manager. What core value has Charlie violated?
    A. Responsibility
    B.   Fairness
    C.   Respect
    D.   Honesty

68. Which project management process group is most likely to be skipped by the project
    manager?
    A. Initiating
    B.   Planning
    C.   Monitoring and Controlling
    D.   Closing

69. A project manager facilitates a kickoff meeting for a project with team members based
    in nine countries. As part of the kickoff, the project manager has the human resource
    manager provide everyone with diversity training. Which value noted within PMI's code
    of conduct supports an environment where diverse perspectives and views are encouraged
    and valued?
    A. Honor
    B.   Respect
    C.   Fairness
    D.   Responsibility

70. As part of performing administrative closure activities, a project manager creates false
    responses to a stakeholder satisfaction survey. He reasons that he has received highly
    positive feedback throughout the entire project and didn't want to be a bother to his
    stakeholders after they worked so hard to successfully finish the project. The project
    manager's actions violated which core value addressed within the Code of Ethics and
    Professional Conduct?
    A. Respect
    B.   Honor
    C.   Honesty
    D.   Integrity
170         Chapter 5        Closing (Domain 5.0)



 71. A project manager hosted a celebration for the project team to reward them for a job well
     done that led to the successful completion of a major project. It was clear to the project
     manager that the team was relaxed and enjoying themselves, with some talking about
     upcoming vacation plans. What type of organizational structure does the project team
     likely work within?
      A. Strong matrix
      B.   Weak matrix
      C.   Project-oriented
      D.   PMO

 72. You are a project manager for Snow Fun, a chain of retail shops specializing in winter
     sports gear and clothing. You've been working on contract with Snow Fun and are
     ready to move on to your next assignment. You are performing administrative closure
     procedures within the Close Project or Phase process, so you are doing all of the following
     regarding this activity except for which one?
      A. Documenting and gathering lessons learned
      B.   Indexing the records and storing them in a safe place
      C.   Updating records to document the final results of the contract
      D.   Analyzing the project success or failure

 73. During a final meeting between the project manager and project sponsor, the sponsor
     asks to review the document that summarizes the project's performance, including
     the validation information on the project's end result. What document is the sponsor
     requesting?
      A. Project management plan
      B.   Final report
      C.   Lessons learned register
      D.   Project documents

 74. A project sponsor calls the project manager to obtain the summary of the performance
     of a project that recently closed. What document can the project manager provide the
     sponsor that will contain this information?
      A. Project management plan
      B.   Final report
      C.   Work performance report
      D.   Work performance information

 75. A role delineation study can best be described as which of the following?
      A. A job analysis
      B.   A credential
      C.   A feasibility study
      D.   A business case
                                                 Chapter 5      Closing (Domain 5.0)            171



76. You are the project manager for a project that will produce a mobile phone application
    that sends alerts when the UV rays are at dangerous levels, alerting users to stay indoors.
    As you move into the final closing stages of the project, you review communications
    generated for and by stakeholders as a method of analyzing feedback. What document will
    you reference to review this feedback?
    A. Change log
    B.   Lessons learned register
    C.   Project communications
    D.   Quality reports

77. A project manager is planning the kickoff meeting for a project that will have team
    members dispersed across nine countries. What can the project manager do to support an
    environment where diverse perspectives and views are encouraged and valued?
    A. Include videoconferencing as an option.
    B.   Have all team members attend the kickoff in person.
    C.   Hold diversity training.
    D.   Have each team member state their name and country.

78. A project manager is in the process of transitioning ongoing maintenance of a system
    recently implemented. What project management process are they performing?
    A. Validate Scope
    B.   Control Quality
    C.   Close Project or Phase
    D.   Control Resources

79. Projects that combine elements of different life cycles to achieve a specific goal are said to
    use what type of project life cycle?
    A. Agile
    B.   Hybrid
    C.   Predictive
    D.   Experimental

80. A project manager is in the process of confirming that all ongoing activities have
    successfully transitioned into operations. The project manager is performing activities
    associated with which project management Knowledge Area?
    A. Project Integration Management
    B.   Project Stakeholder Management
    C.   Project Scope Management
    D.   Project Resource Management
172         Chapter 5       Closing (Domain 5.0)



 81. Which of the following best describes the value of respect that project management
     practitioners should follow?
      A. Our duty to take ownership for the decisions we make or fail to make, the actions we
         take or fail to take, and the consequences that result
      B.   Our duty to make decisions and act impartially and objectively
      C.   Our duty to show a high regard for ourselves, others, and the resources entrusted to us
      D.   Our duty to understand the truth and act in a truthful manner both in our
           communications and in our conduct

 82. All of the following are reasons that can lead to a project ending except for which one?
      A. It evolves into ongoing operations.
      B.   It is cancelled or killed prior to completion.
      C.   It is completed successfully.
      D.   Deliverables are accepted and approved.

 83. A project team wraps up activities to hand over ongoing support of a time-reporting
     system to the information technology operations team. What process output has the
     project team completed?
      A. Final report
      B.   Final product, service, or result transition
      C.   Work performance information
      D.   Accepted deliverable

 84. You are wrapping up the Closing process for your project. You've provided formal notice to the
     seller that the terms of the contract have been satisfied, and you've updated the organizational
     process assets. What tools and techniques have you used to accomplish this process?
      A. Expert judgment, procurement audits, procurement negotiations, and meetings
      B.   Procurement audits, procurement negotiations, analytical techniques, and meetings
      C.   Expert judgment, analytical techniques, and meetings
      D.   Expert judgment, data analysis, claims administration, inspection, and audits

 85. Giving someone the benefit of the doubt and asking for clarification if you believe there is
     a problem can be associated with which core value covered within the Code of Ethics and
     Professional Conduct?
      A. Honor
      B.   Respect
      C.   Fairness
      D.   Responsibility

 86. A project manager is in the process of assembling the final report of the project. What
     project document are they likely to reference to view the completion date of major project
     deliverables?
      A. Final report
      B.   Schedule baseline
                                                 Chapter 5      Closing (Domain 5.0)           173



    C.   Milestone report
    D.   Milestone list

87. All of the following are true regarding the final report except for which one?
    A. It provides justification for the project, including a summary of the project benefits.
    B.   It is generated from the Close Project or Phase process.
    C.   It includes a summary of the project performance.
    D.   It is archived with other project documentation at the conclusion of the project.

88. Which project management process is responsible for collating all lessons learned and
    archiving project documents?
    A. Monitor Stakeholder Engagement
    B.   Control Communications
    C.   Close Project or Phase
    D.   Monitor Project Work

89. A project manager has just closed out a procurement, which produced the final deliverable
    of the project. What is the project manager likely to do next?
    A. Celebrate
    B.   Perform administrative closure
    C.   Release the remaining project resources
    D.   Finalize any open claims

90. A superuser of a customer relationship management system calls the project manager for
    assistance in resolving a system bug recently discovered by a member of his team. What
    has the project manager failed to do?
    A. Provide the appropriate training to superusers to ensure they are equipped to address
       bugs as they arise
    B.   Publish the final report of the project, which would detail how ongoing activities are
         to be addressed
    C.   Release the project team back to their ongoing responsibilities, including the
         superuser community
    D.   Transition the ongoing support and maintenance of the system to the appropriate
         operational team

91. All of the following are characteristics of the Agile life cycle except for which one?
    A. The team typically collaborates to finish the most important feature.
    B.   The team expects requirements to change.
    C.   Feedback is given with the purpose of better planning the next part of the project.
    D.   It combines both iterative and incremental approaches.
174        Chapter 5        Closing (Domain 5.0)



 92. All of the following are formal types of project endings except for which one?
      A. Addition
      B.   Crashing
      C.   Starvation
      D.   Integration

 93. You witness a trusted colleague violating a privacy law of the country in which you are
     both temporarily stationed for an assigned project. What should you do?
      A. Do nothing; this is a trusted colleague whom you assume has ethical intentions.
      B.   Talk to your colleague and highlight that what they have done is wrong.
      C.   Report the actions to the legal department and inform the appropriate management.
      D.   Advise your colleague to talk to the legal department and give them room to take
           action as they see fit.

 94. The project manager conducts a final meeting with the project team to review project
     risks. At what stage of the project is risk the highest?
      A. During project initiation
      B.   During project planning
      C.   During project execution
      D.   During project closure

 95. Which of the following best describes a predictive life cycle?
      A. A traditional approach where the majority of planning occurs up front, followed by
         execution
      B.   An approach that generates finished deliverables that the customer may be able to use
           immediately
      C.   An approach that is a blend of iterative and incremental and that refines and delivers
           frequently
      D.   An approach that focuses on generating feedback early to improve and modify the
           work

 96. A project manager traveled from the United Kingdom to Mexico for a project kickoff
     meeting. During the meeting, they became highly offended when the project sponsor
     attempted to welcome them by giving them a hug. The project manager noticed that many
     people gave a hug as part of personal introductions and decided to leave the meeting after
     feeling that the project team was exhibiting inappropriate behavior. What did the project
     manager experience?
      A. Sexual harassment
      B.   An overfriendly team
      C.   Culture shock
      D.   Inappropriate behavior
                                                   Chapter 5       Closing (Domain 5.0)          175



 97. Which of the following best describes an incremental life cycle?
     A. A traditional approach where the majority of planning occurs up front, followed by
        execution
     B.   An approach that generates finished deliverables that the customer may be able to use
          immediately
     C.   An approach that is a blend of iterative and incremental and that refines and delivers
          frequently
     D.   An approach that focuses on generating feedback early to improve and modify the
          work

 98. A project manager hosted a celebration for the project team to reward them for a job well
     done that led to the successful completion of a major project. It was clear to the project
     manager that the team was relaxed and enjoying themselves, with some talking about
     upcoming vacation plans. What type of project ending is this?
     A. Integration
     B.   Addition
     C.   Extinction
     D.   Starvation

 99. All of the following statements are true regarding the Closing process except which one?
     A. The closed procurements output is part of the Project Procurement Management
        Knowledge Area.
     B.   Close Project or Phase is part of the Project Communications Management
          Knowledge Area.
     C.   Procurement closure activities are performed only for the project phases or
          deliverables performed under contract.
     D.   Closing activities include verifying that the work of the project was completed
          accurately and satisfactorily.

100. All of the following are true regarding the Closing process group except for which one?
     A. It is the fifth and final of the process groups that make up the project management
        life cycle.
     B.   It is where administrative closure of the phase, project, and contracts occurs.
     C.   It is responsible for finalizing all activities for the project, phase, or contract.
     D.   Like the Initiating process group, it consists of two project management processes.

101. A project manager has just received acceptance of the final deliverable. What project
     management process have they just completed?
     A. Close Project or Phase
     B.   Control Scope
     C.   Validate Scope
     D.   Close Procurements
176         Chapter 5       Closing (Domain 5.0)



102. Which of the following best describes responsibility as a core value that project
     management practitioners should abide by?
      A. Our duty to take ownership for the decisions we make or fail to make, the actions we
         take or fail to take, and the consequences that result
      B.   Our duty to make decisions and act impartially and objectively
      C.   Our duty to show a high regard for ourselves, others, and the resources entrusted
           to us
      D.   Our duty to understand the truth and act in a truthful manner both in our
           communications and in our conduct

103. Predictive, iterative, incremental, and Agile are all types of what?
      A. Delivery methods
      B.   Project life cycles
      C.   Project management methodologies
      D.   Project management frameworks

104. All of the following are true regarding the Code of Ethics and Professional Conduct
     except for which one?
      A. It addresses responsibility, honesty, respect, and fairness.
      B.   It contains core values that project management practitioners are highly advised to
           uphold.
      C.   Adhering to the code is mandatory for PMI members.
      D.   Values identified in the code stem from practitioners from the global project
           management community.

105. You are a project manager working in an organization that is considered to be a weak
     matrix organizational type. You are two months into a four-month project, when the
     functional manager for half of your most critical resources announces that she will be
     reallocating them to another project. You explain to her that this will result in early
     closure of your project and that resources should not be redirected. If the functional
     manager succeeds in reallocating the resources, what type of ending will the project
     experience?
      A. Extinction
      B.   Starvation
      C.   Integration
      D.   Addition

106. A project manager is performing closure activities for the project and meets with the
     project sponsor to review the final report. The report reveals that the project budget is 90
     percent consumed. The project sponsor expresses concern that there may be a risk of going
     over budget. How is the project manager likely to respond?
      A. Assure the project sponsor that the risk of going over budget is low.
      B.   Agree with the project sponsor and begin risk mitigation activities.
                                                 Chapter 5      Closing (Domain 5.0)           177



     C.   Email the project team to express disappointment in project spending.
     D.   Take offense at the project sponsor's lack of trust and confidence.

107. A junior project manager works with the procurement manager to review vendor proposals.
     The procurement manager decides to select a vendor who did not have the highest weighted
     score against the criteria that were predetermined. The project manager learns that the
     vendor is the procurement manager's cousin. What should the project manager do?
     A. Bring this to the procurement manager's attention and report it to the appropriate
        department for investigation.
     B.   Do nothing. Project managers should respect the role and authority of each member
          of the team.
     C.   Confront the procurement manager and threaten to report their behavior to the ethics
          committee.
     D.   Overturn the procurement manager's decision and select the vendor with the highest
          weighted score.

108. A project manager is performing closing activities and is getting ready to release project
     resources. What document can they reference for guidance on how resources are to be released?
     A. Project schedule
     B.   Project management plan
     C.   Release plan
     D.   Project documents

109. You are a project manager working on a new ad campaign for the holiday season. Part of
     this project entails a series of new TV commercials. You contracted out the production
     of the commercials that will air during the busy buying season. Now all of the work of
     the project is done, and you're closing out the project. You're gathering information from
     the vendor, including some detailed technical specifications for the commercials that
     were produced by them, along with the WBS, the project schedule, financial and payment
     records, and more. Which of the following contains this information?
     A. Procurement documentation
     B.   Project documents
     C.   Contract file
     D.   Work performance data

110. Which of the following best describes an Agile life cycle?
     A. A traditional approach where the majority of planning occurs up front, followed by
        execution
     B.   An approach that generates finished deliverables that the customer may be able to use
          immediately
     C.   An approach that is a blend of iterative and incremental and that refines and delivers
          frequently
     D.   An approach that focuses on generating feedback early to improve and modify
          the work
178         Chapter 5       Closing (Domain 5.0)



111. The Code of Ethics and Professional Conduct applies to all of the following groups of
     individuals, except for which one?
      A. Those holding PMI certification
      B.   All PMI members
      C.   Those volunteering through PMI
      D.   Project team members

112. A junior project manager works with the procurement manager to review vendor
     proposals. The procurement manager decides to select a vendor who did not have the
     highest weighted score against the criteria that were predetermined. The project manager
     learns that the vendor is the procurement manager's cousin. The procurement manager's
     actions can be construed as what?
      A. Vendor selection
      B.   Preferential treatment
      C.   Violation of procurement code
      D.   Conflict of interest

113. As part of closing out the project, a project manager sits down with the project sponsor
     for a final meeting. They review the final report. The project sponsor then asks the project
     manager to share the documentation summarizing knowledge gained throughout the
     project. What document is the sponsor looking for?
      A. Final report
      B.   Lessons learned register
      C.   Project documents
      D.   Quality reports

114. Gagandeep is a fellow project manager who has been managing a project to install an
     enterprise resource planning system. You've enjoyed hearing stories of how the project
     progressed over the past two years and feel just as invested in its successful outcome
     as Gagandeep. He shares with you that during a recent conversation with the project
     sponsor, the sponsor shared that the project team would be absorbed as permanent full-
     time staff supporting the system and that the project would be considered closed. What
     type of project ending is this?
      A. Integration
      B.   Addition
      C.   Extinction
      D.   Starvation

115. David is a project manager working for a prominent book publishing company. As part of
     his latest project, he uses an approach that yields frequent smaller deliverables throughout
     the span of the project. What type of project life cycle is David using?
      A. Predictive
      B.   Incremental
                                                 Chapter 5      Closing (Domain 5.0)             179



     C.   Waterfall
     D.   Agile

116. Alfred accepts a job as a security program manager, even though he is not qualified for
     the role. He reasons that he can learn on the job, despite not having met the position
     requirements. What value did Alfred fail to uphold?
     A. Honor
     B.   Honesty
     C.   Respect
     D.   Responsibility

117. A project has the highest probability of completing successfully at which stage of the
     project?
     A. During project initiation
     B.   During project planning
     C.   During project execution
     D.   During project closure

118. You are the project manager of a construction company that is working on a project to
     build a new community of townhomes. You serve as a member of the board for one of the
     vendors bidding on the contract to pour the foundations of the homes. You are following
     the documented procurement processes and know you will be unbiased during the vendor
     selection process. What actions should you take, if any?
     A. None, since you strictly adhered to the procurement process.
     B.   Ensure that the project sponsor and decision committee are aware of your relationship
          with the vendor.
     C.   Give a strong reference, in writing, for the vendor company you are affiliated with,
          since you can vouch for their work.
     D.   Step down as the project manager so that the vendor company you are affiliated with
          can compete for the contract.

119. Your project is progressing nicely. One of the key deliverables for your project was
     contracted out to a vendor, but your organization is performing all the remaining work
     of the project. The completion of this deliverable marks the end of the design phase of
     the project. There are several more phases to go, and the internal team is responsible for
     all of the remaining deliverables. Which of the following Closing processes should be
     performed, if any?
     A. Close Project or Phase and Close Procurements
     B.   Close Project or Phase only
     C.   Close Procurements only
     D.   No closing processes should be performed yet because the work of the project isn't
          finished.
180         Chapter 5       Closing (Domain 5.0)



120. You are the project manager for a project that will produce a mobile phone application
     that sends alerts when the UV rays are at dangerous levels, alerting users to stay indoors.
     You are in the process of confirming that all remaining project activities have been
     transitioned to operations. These activities are associated with what process group?
      A. Planning
      B.   Executing
      C.   Monitoring and Controlling
      D.   Closing

121. Quincy and Michael are two executives of Widgets for Life, a company providing the
     latest cool lifestyle gadgets. As part of their annual planning process, they sit down to
     evaluate three projects linked to their department objectives that are in the midst of
     execution. They determine that in order to tackle the newest program announced by their
     CEO, they will need to redirect all critical resources away from the three projects. What
     type of project ending did the three projects experience?
      A. Addition
      B.   Extinction
      C.   Integration
      D.   Starvation

122. Fairness, one of four values that project management practitioners should abide by, can
     best be described as:
      A. Our duty to take ownership for the decisions we make or fail to make, the actions we
         take or fail to take, and the consequences that result
      B.   Our duty to make decisions and act impartially and objectively
      C.   Our duty to show a high regard for ourselves, others, and the resources entrusted to us
      D.   Our duty to understand the truth and act in a truthful manner both in our
           communications and in our conduct

123. All of the following are examples of administrative closure activities except for which one?
      A. Addressing contested changes to a contract
      B.   Updating procurement records to reflect final results
      C.   Archiving procurement information for future use
      D.   Confirming formal acceptance of a seller's work

124. Abiding by and complying with laws and regulations, confidentiality of information, and
     accepting assignments for which you are qualified as a project manager are examples of
     upholding which value?
      A. Honor
      B.   Honesty
      C.   Respect
      D.   Responsibility
                                                 Chapter 5      Closing (Domain 5.0)              181



125. You are a project manager working in an organization that is considered to be a weak
     matrix organizational type. You are two months into a four-month project when the
     functional manager for half of your most critical resources announces that she will be
     reallocating them to another project. You explain to her that this will result in early
     closure of your project and that resources should not be redirected. What is the likely
     outcome of this scenario?
     A. Resources will be distributed to another project.
     B.   Resources will not be distributed to another project.
     C.   You will resign, and the project will end.
     D.   The functional manager will pull the project budget.

126. You work for a nonprofit organization in your local community. Your project will
     establish a new community outreach program for preteens. This project is being funded
     by a grant awarded to your organization based on its innovative ideas and approach.
     The project has consumed more financial resources than originally anticipated, so you've
     written and submitted a request for additional grant money to continue with the project.
     Today you received word that the grant has been denied. All of the following statements
     are true except for which one?
     A. This project came about as a result of a social need.
     B.   Cost overruns should have been identified when performance measures were taken.
     C.   This project ended because of extinction.
     D.   Corrective action should have been put into place to keep the project on track with
          the plan and the budget.

127. Carina is a principal project manager of You've Got Dogs, a specialty company that
     creates custom dog apparel and toys. She has just entered the final stages of the project.
     What is she likely to do first?
     A. Archive lessons learned
     B.   Hold a celebration for the project team
     C.   Review the project management plan
     D.   Release all project resources

128. Cheryl is a procurement manager assigned to a project that implemented a new system
     patching service. She sits down with the project manager to review the final performance
     of the primary vendor used, highlighting the many issues that they experienced with the
     vendor, including delivering three weeks late and going over budget by $5,000. Cheryl
     spends an additional hour with the project manager identifying what they could have done
     differently and what they did well in addressing the vendor issues as they occurred. What
     activity are Cheryl and the project manager engaged in?
     A. Finalizing an open claim with the vendor
     B.   Generating a work performance report
     C.   Confirming formal acceptance of the vendor's work
     D.   Capturing lessons learned
182         Chapter 5      Closing (Domain 5.0)



129. Who is responsible for writing the project's final report?
      A. All stakeholders
      B.   Project sponsor
      C.   Project manager
      D.   Executive sponsor

130. You are the project manager of a construction company that is working on a project to
     build a new community of townhomes. A vendor that is bidding on the electrical contract
     for the project knows you are a big fan of your favorite comedian and sends you two
     tickets to attend a show. You know that the tickets are expensive, valued at more than
     $500 based on the location of the seats. What should you do?
      A. Respectfully decline the gift and send back the tickets.
      B.   Accept the tickets since you already accepted another gift from a separate vendor
           competing for the same contract.
      C.   Respectfully decline the gift but keep the tickets for evidence.
      D.   Accept the tickets, but take the project sponsor, who is also a fan of the comedian.

131. Which of the following best describes honesty as a value that project management
     practitioners should abide by?
      A. Our duty to take ownership for the decisions we make or fail to make, the actions we
         take or fail to take, and the consequences that result
      B.   Our duty to make decisions and act impartially and objectively
      C.   Our duty to show a high regard for ourselves, others, and the resources entrusted
           to us
      D.   Our duty to understand the truth and act in a truthful manner both in our
           communications and in our conduct

132. Which of the following best describes an iterative life cycle?
      A. A traditional approach where the majority of planning occurs up front, followed by
         execution
      B.   An approach that generates finished deliverables that the customer may be able to use
           immediately
      C.   An approach that is a blend of iterative and incremental that refines and delivers
           frequently
      D.   An approach that focuses on generating feedback early to improve and modify
           the work

133. Lessons learned are used for all of the following except which one?
      A. To provide historical information that you can review during your next project
      B.   To document employee performance
      C.   To identify successes and failures on the project
      D.   To record the causes of performance variances
                                                Chapter 5      Closing (Domain 5.0)          183



134. Which organizational process asset should you utilize when carrying out the Close Project
     or Phase process?
     A. Marketplace conditions
     B.   Configuration management knowledge base
     C.   Financial management and accounts payable system
     D.   Procurement policies

135. All of the following are tools and techniques of the Close Project or Phase process except
     for which one?
     A. Inspection
     B.   Expert judgment
     C.   Meetings
     D.   Data analysis

136. As a value upheld by the project management community, responsibility entails which of
     the following?
     A. Ensuring integrity
     B.   Maintaining professional demeanor
     C.   Reporting ethics violations
     D.   Avoiding conflict of interest

137. Cheryl is a procurement manager assigned to a project that implemented a new system
     patching service. She sits down with the project manager to review the final performance
     of the primary vendor used, highlighting the many issues that they experienced with the
     vendor, including delivering three weeks late and going over budget by $5,000. Cheryl
     spends an additional hour with the project manager identifying what they could have done
     differently and what they did well in addressing the vendor issues as they occurred. What
     project management process are they performing?
     A. Control Procurements
     B.   Close Procurements
     C.   Close Project or Phase
     D.   Monitor Procurements

138. All of the following statements about fairness are true except for which one?
     A. Conflicts of interest might include your associations or affiliations.
     B.   Accepting vendor gifts is sometimes acceptable.
     C.   Fairness includes avoiding favoritism and discrimination.
     D.   Fairness encompasses diversity training and preventing culture shock.
184         Chapter 5       Closing (Domain 5.0)



139. A project manager has just received acceptance of the final deliverable. What project
     management process are they likely to perform next?
      A. Close Project or Phase
      B.   Control Scope
      C.   Validate Scope
      D.   Close Procurements

140. Your organization is experiencing a shakeup at the top levels of management. Your project
     team has expressed concerns that their project might be canceled because of the changes
     going on at the top. Sure enough, your project team was correct in those suspicions.
     You've received notice that the project is canceled. Your vendor has only one remaining
     deliverable for the project scheduled for completion next month. You notify the vendor
     in writing that the project has been canceled, but you understand there is one more
     deliverable they need to complete in order to close out the contract. You also notify them
     that the Phase II portion of the project has been canceled, so current contract negotiations
     for that portion of the project will end immediately. All of the following processes should
     be performed given the circumstances in this question except for which one?
      A. Lessons learned
      B.   Close Project or Phase
      C.   Validate Scope
      D.   Control Procurements

141. Project Integration Management Knowledge Area consists of all of the following project
     management processes except for which one?
      A. Manage Lessons Learned
      B.   Close Project or Phase
      C.   Monitor and Control Project Work
      D.   Manage Project Knowledge

142. Which of the following stages of the Tuckman ladder addresses the completion of the
     work and release of staff?
      A. Concluding
      B.   Adjourning
      C.   Releasing
      D.   Closing

143. Carina is a principal project manager of You've Got Dogs, a specialty company that
     creates custom dog apparel and toys. As is part of her practice, she sits down with her
     sponsor to evaluate how the project is performing. She reviews feedback from the most
     recent prototype, which the team has produced successively to yield additional insight.
                                                 Chapter 5      Closing (Domain 5.0)            185



     Carina notes to the sponsor that the use of timeboxing has been helpful in reducing the
     uncertainty in the project. What type of life cycle is Carina using?
     A. Predictive
     B.   Waterfall
     C.   Agile
     D.   Iterative

144. A project manager has just begun working on activities to close out the project. To
     improve the metrics of the organization, the project manager decides to evaluate what was
     initially planned versus the end result of the project. Which of the following inputs can the
     project manager reference for this information?
     A. Assumption log
     B.   Quality reports
     C.   Project charter
     D.   Basis of estimates

145. A project manager is updating a presentation slide with updates on a high visibility
     project for a monthly customer service review. The purchase order for hardware had not
     been placed yet because of multiple complications in the process, which would cause
     the schedule to slip by a minimum of two weeks. The project manager knew that the
     customer would be enraged. Hoping to not cause a scene, he omits this information in the
     presentation update, with a plan of crashing the schedule to make up for the slip. What
     core value has the project manager violated?
     A. Fairness
     B.   Honesty
     C.   Respect
     D.   Responsibility

146. A project manager is getting ready to wrap up his project and is interested in referencing
     the organization's policies on project closure surveys. What is a valid input that the project
     manager can use to get this information?
     A. Organizational process assets
     B.   Enterprise environmental factors
     C.   Project documents
     D.   Lessons learned register

147. As a value upheld by the project management community, fairness entails which of the
     following?
     A. Ensuring integrity
     B.   Maintaining professional demeanor
     C.   Reporting ethics violations
     D.   Avoiding conflict of interest
186         Chapter 5       Closing (Domain 5.0)



148. Your project is running behind schedule and over budget. The account manager of a
     supplier you've worked with before tells you that if you select them for a contract they are
     bidding on, they will throw in a free resource. Later that day, you meet with the vendor
     selection committee and see that the vendor ranks at the bottom of the stack. You select
     the vendor anyway to help the budget, even though it goes against the procurement policy.
     How may your actions be perceived?
      A. Heroic
      B.   Conflict of interest
      C.   Justified
      D.   Improving cost variance

149. Your project involves the research and development of a new food additive. You're ready to
     release the product to your customer when you discover that a minor reaction might occur
     in people with certain conditions. The reactions to date have been very minor, and no
     known long-lasting side effects have been noted. As project manager, what should you do?
      A. Do nothing because the reactions are so minor that very few people will be affected.
      B.   Inform the customer that you've discovered this condition and tell them you'll
           research it further to determine its impacts.
      C.   Inform your customer that there is no problem with the additive except for an
           extremely small percentage of the population and release the product to them.
      D.   Tell the customer you'll correct the reaction problems in the next batch, but you'll
           release the first batch of product to them now to begin using.

150. Nicolas is the project manager of a project that has been described as revolutionizing the
     mobile fitness tracking industry. Recently, Nicolas completed a final report for the project,
     held a lessons learned meeting, and validated that all project objectives had been met
     successfully. What type of project ending is this?
      A. Addition
      B.   Extinction
      C.   Starvation
      D.   Integration

151. While performing activities associated with controlling project and product scope, a
     project manager uncovers scope creep. The project manager learns that the scope creep
     was a result of a close friend, who is a prominent stakeholder of the project. What should
     the project manager do?
      A. Do nothing, since the scope creep is a result of a close friend and a prominent stakeholder.
      B.   Reverse the changes that yielded the scope creep since the scope was unapproved.
      C.   Bring the scope creep to light and address it with the change control board.
      D.   Do nothing, since scope creep can yield positive changes for the project.

152. Antwon is the director of marketing for a midsize company. You run into him while
     heating coffee in the office kitchenette and ask him what he's up to. He notes that he's
     getting ready to kick off the implementation of a new system that will allow his designers
     to interact with the program from any device outside of the immediate network. He adds
     that the project would use in-house resources to keep the project budget to a minimum.
                                                  Chapter 5      Closing (Domain 5.0)           187



      In a fit of nerves, you walk back quickly to your office, knowing that this means two of
      your most critical resources would be reassigned soon, leading to the early closure of your
      project. What type of project ending is this?
     A. Starvation
     B.   Integration
     C.   Extinction
     D.   Addition

153. A project manager has just closed a procurement, performing activities associated with the
     Control Procurements process. What are they likely to do next in order to finalize closure
     activities for the contract?
     A. Archive all documentation and record lessons learned for the project.
     B.   Monitor the procurement relationship to ensure that all stakeholders are satisfied.
     C.   Obtain formal written notice that the contract has been completed.
     D.   Finalize open claims and confirm formal acceptance of the seller's work.

154. As a value upheld by the project management community, respect entails which of the
     following?
     A. Ensuring integrity
     B.   Maintaining professional demeanor
     C.   Reporting ethics violations
     D.   Avoiding conflict of interest

155. You are the project manager for a construction company that is building a new city and
     county office building in your city. To date, you've developed detailed plans, baselined the
     plans, and maintained tight control of changes. What type of project life cycle are
     you using?
     A. Iterative
     B.   Agile
     C.   Predictive
     D.   Incremental

156. Ralph is a project manager for Storm Health. He has struggled since joining the company,
     and his manager has noticed multiple gaps in critical PM skills. During a recent meeting,
     Ralph incorrectly claimed that the project budget had been fully approved. As a result,
     multiple purchase orders were processed, which alerted his manager, who knew that the
     budget had not yet been approved. The manager decides to confront Ralph, who admits
     to intentionally giving misinformation in the hopes that the budget would be approved
     and that all would be OK. What core value has Ralph violated as a project management
     practitioner?
     A. Fairness
     B.   Honesty
     C.   Respect
     D.   Responsibility
188         Chapter 5      Closing (Domain 5.0)



157. You have just prepared an RFP for release. Your project involves a substantial amount of
     contract work detailed in the RFP. Your favorite vendor drops by and offers to give you
     and your spouse the use of their company condo for your upcoming vacation. It's located
     in a beautiful resort community that happens to be one of your favorite places to go for a
     getaway. What is the most appropriate response?
      A. Thank the vendor but decline the offer because you know this could be considered a
         conflict of interest.
      B.   Thank the vendor and accept. This vendor is always offering you incentives like this,
           so this offer does not likely have anything to do with the recent RFP release.
      C.   Thank the vendor, accept the offer, and immediately tell your project sponsor so
           they're aware of what you're doing.
      D.   Thank the vendor but decline the offer because you've already made another
           arrangement for this vacation. Ask them whether you can take a rain check and
           arrange another time to use the condo.

158. All of the following are true regarding the characteristics of project closure except for
     which one?
      A. Risk of successfully completing the project is at its highest.
      B.   Stakeholders have the least amount of influence.
      C.   Project costs taper off as spending comes to an end.
      D.   Likelihood of completing the project is at its highest.

159. Cheryl is a procurement manager assigned to a project that implemented a new system
     patching service. Although she experienced a multitude of issues with the vendor, the
     project manager and sponsor decide to accept the vendor's result, and she then provides
     the vendor with formal written notice that the contract has been completed. What project
     management process has just been carried out?
      A. Control Procurements
      B.   Close Procurements
      C.   Close Project or Phase
      D.   Monitor Procurements

160. The key function of the Close Project or Phase process is to perform which of the
     following?
      A. Formalize lessons learned and distribute this information to project participants.
      B.   Perform audits to verify the project results against the project requirements.
      C.   Complete all the activities associated with closing out the project management
           processes in order to close out the project or phase.
      D.   Review the scope baseline and other project documents to make certain the work
           reflected in the documents is complete and accurate.
Chapter   Full-Length Practice

 6
          Exam




               The process names, inputs, tools and techniques,
               outputs, and descriptions of the project manage-
               ment process groups and related materials and
               figures in this chapter are based on content from
               A Guide to the Project Management Body of
               Knowledge (PMBOK(R) Guide), Sixth Edition
               (PMI(R), 2017).
190         Chapter 6      Full-Length Practice Exam



  1. Which quality theorist is noted for his "fitness for use" premise?
      A. Philip Crosby
      B.   Joseph Juran
      C.   W. Edwards Deming
      D.   Walter Shewhart

  2. A project manager is in the process of developing the charter, alongside the project
     sponsor. While preparing a draft of the document, the project manager looks for
     information on the cost-benefit analysis. Which of the following inputs can the project
     manager reference for this information?
      A. Business case
      B.   Benefits management plan
      C.   Agreements
      D.   Project scope statement

  3. A project manager is in the process of allocating resources, managing their work, and
     addressing changes to the plan. Which of the following is a valid tool or technique to assist
     the project manager in performing these activities?
      A. Data gathering
      B.   Project management information system
      C.   Data analysis
      D.   Decision-making

  4. If earned value = 2,500, planned value = 2,300, and actual costs = 2,200, what is the
     schedule variance?
      A.- 200
      B.- 100
      C.   200
      D.   100

  5. You are a senior project manager working at a manufacturing plant that produces
     components used by the aviation industry. You are in the process of implementing
     approved changes. What key information will you need to successfully complete the
     associated activities?
      A. Lessons learned register
      B.   Change requests
      C.   Approved change requests
      D.   Project schedule
                                         Chapter 6      Full-Length Practice Exam              191



6. Alyssa is a risk manager supporting multiple projects. As part of performing risk
   management activities for her largest project, she facilitates a working session to compare
   technical accomplishments to the schedule of technical achievements. What project
   management process is she performing?
   A. Direct and Manage Project Work
   B.   Control Quality
   C.   Monitor Risks
   D.   Monitor and Control Project Work

7. A project manager brainstorms with the project sponsor the various approaches they
   could take to gather requirements. The sponsor advises that they use a trained facilitator
   to facilitate dialogue among their customer base to elicit requirements. Which of the
   following techniques brings together subject-matter experts in order for them to share
   feedback and expectations on a proposed product?
   A. Benchmarking
   B.   Interviews
   C.   Focus groups
   D.   Questionnaires

8. Sally is managing a project that will build a new data center to host various devices for
   customers. Sally and the sponsor are currently working with the procurement team to
   secure a vendor that will manage tier 1 support after the data center goes live. To date,
   they have developed the procurement management plan, decided to use a fixed-price
   agreement, and published the request for proposal (RFP). What project management
   process will Sally and the team perform next?
   A. Plan Procurement Management
   B.   Develop Schedule
   C.   Conduct Procurements
   D.   Control Procurements

9. Which of the following describes the key benefit of the Direct and Manage Project Work
   process?
   A. It allows stakeholders to comprehend what actions need to be taken, based on the
      current state of the project.
   B.   It improves project outcomes by leveraging and creating knowledge that is used by
        future projects or phases.
   C.   It provides overall management of the project work and deliverables, thereby
        improving the probability of success.
   D.   It addresses overall risk by considering changes in an integrated manner and allows
        for documented changes.
192         Chapter 6       Full-Length Practice Exam



 10. All of the following are tools and techniques of the Manage Project Knowledge process
     except for which one?
      A. Knowledge management
      B.   Information management
      C.   Interpersonal and team skills
      D.   Lessons learned register

 11. Marysil prepares for an exciting day that involves a celebration with the project team for
     completing the final deliverable of the project. The project has already received recognition
     for completing major milestones on time and remaining under budget. Some of the
     resources, including vendors, will remain with the project during a transitional period
     in which ongoing support work will shift to the operations team. What document should
     Marysil reference to ensure that resources are released properly?
      A. Project management plan
      B.   Stakeholder engagement plan
      C.   Communications management plan
      D.   Resource management plan

 12. Bob is a project manager working on a multi-year project that will erect a new 10-acre
     mall. Bob has a reputation for being inclusive and considering all of the facts before
     making decisions. What leadership style does Bob use?
      A. Laissez-faire
      B.   Autocratic
      C.   Democratic
      D.   Transactional

 13. You are a project manager working on the production of a new book light for the
     consumer market. Which of the following do you know is true?
      A. Project decisions now can impact cost of quality in the form of customer satisfaction
         and quality metrics and impact the quality baseline.
      B.   Project decisions now can impact cost of quality in the form of returns, warranty
           claims, and recalls.
      C.   Project decisions now can impact quality metrics, which are later used in the Perform
           Quality Assurance and Perform Quality Control processes.
      D.   Project decisions now can impact the process improvement plan by determining how
           the process configuration and targets for improved performance will provide control
           over the status of processes.
                                          Chapter 6      Full-Length Practice Exam             193



14. Using the values noted within the following table, identify the critical path:

    Activity Name           Successor             Duration
    A                       B, C, D               2
    B                       E                     6
    C                       F                     4
    D                       F                     7
    E                       F                     3
    F                       G                     2
    G                       None                  5

    A. A-B-E-F-G
    B.   A-C-F-G
    C.   A-D-F-G
    D.   A-B-E-F

15. Mary Beth is nine months into a project that is estimated to complete within a one-year
    period. She is currently in the process of defining a new phase of the project, with plans to
    kick off the work of the new phase within a two-week period. What project management
    process group is this activity associated with?
    A. Initiating
    B.   Planning
    C.   Executing
    D.   Monitoring and Controlling

16. A project manager working within a global e-commerce company struggled to get team
    members to deliver consistent results. In her latest project, she began using her relationship
    with the president as leverage to get her team to prioritize work on her project. What type
    of power is does this describe?
    A. Referent
    B.   Relational
    C.   Coercive
    D.   Expert
194         Chapter 6       Full-Length Practice Exam



 17. A project manager is in the process of monitoring cost performance using the earned-value
     analysis technique to determine whether any existing variances against the plan are within
     the established tolerance levels. In addition to work performance data, what valid input
     can assist the project manager in performing this activity?
      A. Work performance information
      B.   Performance measurement baseline
      C.   Project documents
      D.   Organizational process assets

 18. Which of the following conflict resolution techniques require both parties to give up
     something to reach a solution?
      A. Collaborate
      B.   Avoid
      C.   Problem-solve
      D.   Reconcile

 19. During an annual planning meeting, a portfolio manager presents three competing
     projects to a steering committee. The first project has a payback period of six months and
     an NPV of 2, the second project has a payback period of nine months and an NPV of 1,
     and the third project has a payback period of five months and an NPV of -0.5. Which
     project should the steering committee choose, based solely on NPV?
      A. First project
      B.   Second project
      C.   Third project
      D.   None

 20. You know the following information: BAC = 1,500, EAC = 1,700, PV = 475, EV = 500, and
     AC = 425. Which of the following is the correct ETC given this information?
      A. 1,275
      B.   200
      C.   1,200
      D.   1,025

 21. A project manager has just finished acquiring resources for the upcoming phase of a
     project. What process are they likely to perform next?
      A. Develop Team
      B.   Plan Resource Management
      C.   Control Resources
      D.   Estimate Activity Resources
                                          Chapter 6      Full-Length Practice Exam             195



22. Ron knows that he can lean on his most senior engineer, John, to inspire a sense of
    camaraderie within the team. According to the Achievement Theory, what need motivates
    John?
    A. Achievement
    B.   Power
    C.   Belonging
    D.   Affiliation

23. Which of the following contract types presents the greatest risk to the buyer?
    A. Time and material
    B.   Cost-reimbursable
    C.   Fixed price
    D.   Fixed price with economic price adjustments

24. Which of the following project management processes involves determining the type and
    quantity of material, equipment, and supplies needed to perform the project work?
    A. Define Activities
    B.   Estimate Activity Durations
    C.   Estimate Activity Resources
    D.   Estimate Costs

25. A project manager struggled to resolve an issue occurring between two team members
    who could not agree on a design for the device being built through the project. The project
    manager consulted with the sponsor, who insisted that the project manager continue
    facilitating discussions to tease out the facts in order to identify the right solution to the
    problem. What type of conflict resolution technique is the sponsor insisting be used?
    A. Collaborate
    B.   Reconcile
    C.   Withdraw
    D.   Compromise

26. During a planning meeting, a group of project team members expressed concerns
    regarding requirements gathered to date, noting that the customer was not very clear on
    what they wanted. They urged the project manager to add in an additional preliminary
    phase that would allow them to get feedback early, before the team spent too much time
    developing the product. What is the project manager likely to do next?
    A. Continue moving forward according to the existing plan
    B.   Create a context diagram to generate a scope model
    C.   Hold a series of focus groups with the customer
    D.   Incorporate a prototype into the plan
196         Chapter 6      Full-Length Practice Exam



 27. A project manager is carrying out activities associated with the Develop Team process.
     What result will these activities produce?
      A. Physical resource assignments
      B.   Team performance assessments
      C.   Work performance information
      D.   Resource requirements

 28. You are the project manager for Xylophone Phonics, which writes and develops children's
     software programs that teach basic reading and math skills. You are performing the Plan
     Quality Management process and have discovered that the customer requirements have
     not been satisfied. You go back to the team and realize you will need to scrap some of
     what was done and rewrite parts of the code. Which of the following does this describe?
      A. Costs of poor quality associated with customer requirements that are not satisfied
         when the organization is still in control of the product
      B.   Costs of poor quality associated with warranty work and additional customer service
           costs
      C.   Cost to examine the product to make certain requirements are met
      D.   Costs to keep the defects out of the hands of the customer

 29. A project manager expressed frustration to her sponsor after learning that her resources
     were being distributed to other projects. The sponsor then shared that a recent change to
     the enterprise priorities caused the immediate shift to occur and that her project was being
     cancelled. What type of ending did this project experience?
      A. Integration
      B.   Starvation
      C.   Addition
      D.   Extinction

 30. Which of the following processes is responsible for monitoring the planned versus actual
     utilization of physical resources and taking action as needed?
      A. Acquire Resources
      B.   Develop Team
      C.   Manage Team
      D.   Control Resources

 31. A project manager has worked closely with the project team to develop the subsidiary
     management plans identified as necessary. Using various estimating techniques and the
     guidance of experts, they have also carefully documented the scope and generated a
     project schedule and budget. What is the project manager likely to do next?
      A. Begin execution of the work.
      B.   Facilitate a kick-off meeting.
      C.   Baseline the plan.
      D.   Publish the plan.
                                           Chapter 6      Full-Length Practice Exam             197



32. Pamela is a project manager who is deep into project execution. Currently, she is working
    on increasing stakeholder involvement and interaction within the project, utilizing the
    stakeholder engagement plan for guidance. What is the likely result of Pamela's efforts?
    A. Change requests
    B.   Lessons learned register
    C.   Issue log
    D.   Stakeholder register

33. A project manager has recently communicated a complete performance index (TCPI) of
    2.0 to the project sponsor. What does this mean?
    A. The team must maintain their existing efficiency in order to complete the project
       according to the plan.
    B.   The team must increase their existing efficiency in order to complete the project
         according to the plan.
    C.   The team will not be able to complete the project according to the plan, no matter
         what the increase is to their efficiency.
    D.   The team must reduce their existing efficiency in order to complete the project
         according to the plan.

34. A project manager is in the process of allocating resources, managing the project team's
    work, and addressing changes to the plan. What output is the project manager looking to
    generate through these activities?
    A. Project management plan
    B.   Issue log
    C.   Approved change requests
    D.   Deliverables

35. All of the following are tools and techniques of the Control Schedule process except for
    which one?
    A. Critical path method
    B.   Schedule compression
    C.   Agile release planning
    D.   Project management information system

36. During a risk management meeting, Bob walks the project team through new risks
    added to the risk register. He highlights the risk of flooding at a new call center site their
    project is dependent on because of unexpected inclement weather. The team unanimously
    agrees that additional insurance should be purchased on the gear that would be installed
    at this location. What type of risk response strategy has the team used?
    A. Accept
    B.   Mitigate
    C.   Avoid
    D.   Transfer
198         Chapter 6        Full-Length Practice Exam



 37. Ashley is a principal project manager working for a global tour company headquartered in
     Ireland. Recently, Ashley was formally tasked with leading the development of a new tour
     that would take customers across 10 countries in 10 days within South America. While
     Ashley is grabbing a coffee at the office cafe, a colleague from the marketing department
     approaches her, noting that she was excited to be joining Ashley as the marketing lead for
     the project. Ashley was unaware of any preassignments. Where can Ashley look to validate
     whether her colleague was preassigned to the project?
      A. Project management plan
      B.   Business case
      C.   Project charter
      D.   Contract

 38. Based on the following information, which project should be selected by the steering
     committee?
      Project A: payback period = 4 years; IRR = 5 percent
      Project B: payback period = 3.5 years; IRR = 7 percent
      Project C: payback period = 2 years; IRR = 3 percent
      A. Project A
      B.   Project B
      C.   Project C
      D.   None

 39. Ron is a project manager who has a reputation for motivating his team to deliver
     top performance. In his most recent project, he was able to obtain approval from the
     sponsor to provide a team-wide bonus if they hit an upcoming critical milestone. What
     motivational theory is Ron leveraging to motivate the team?
      A. Achievement Theory
      B.   Expectancy Theory
      C.   Maslow's Hierarchy of Needs
      D.   Hygiene Theory

 40. You are a project manager for Book Lovers' Exchange, a retail chain of bookstores. The
     company has recently decided to offer its titles on an Internet site and has asked you to
     head up this project. The project sponsor has told you that quality is a primary driver on
     this project. You are using techniques such as flowcharts, logical data model, and matrix
     diagrams to perform a Planning process. Which of the following is true?
      A. These are used to design experiments, a tool and technique of the Plan Quality
         Management process.
      B.   These are techniques used to produce the process improvement plan, which is an
           output of the Plan Quality Management process.
      C.   These are data representation tools, a tool and technique of the Plan Quality
           Management process.
      D.   These are planning tools used in the performance of quality audits, which is a tool
           and technique of the Plan Quality Management process.
                                          Chapter 6      Full-Length Practice Exam            199



41. Judy works for the You Name It! gaming company, which specializes in games for young
    adults. As part of her latest project, Judy is working with a team to develop a game using
    virtual reality technology. To date, she has collected requirements and is now taking the
    team through a working session to identify the deliverables and acceptance criteria. Where
    will Judy document the results of the working session?
    A. Project scope statement
    B.   Requirements log
    C.   Work breakdown structure
    D.   Scope management plan

42. A project manager is in the process of documenting how scope will be identified,
    decomposed, and monitored and controlled for her project. In what activity is the project
    manager engaged?
    A. Creating the project scope statement
    B.   Developing the scope management plan
    C.   Capturing project requirements
    D.   Creating a work breakdown structure

43. A project management office (PMO) organization held a weekly staff meeting for project
    managers to remain up to date on interdependent projects. During this meeting, Jill
    shared that her project had closed, and she had moved on to another assignment. Roy
    immediately expressed concern about the news, since his own project was dependent on
    ongoing support that should have gone live for the system that was deployed through Jill's
    now closed project. He explained that he had not heard of this milestone occurring. What
    closure step did Jill miss?
    A. Archiving support documentation
    B.   Sending out a closure email
    C.   Transitioning to operations
    D.   Measuring stakeholder satisfaction

44. All of the following are activities that occur as part of the Executing process group, except
    for which one?
    A. Coordinating resources and managing stakeholder engagement
    B.   Collecting project performance data and producing performance measures
    C.   Integrating and performing activities according to the plan
    D.   Implementing approved change requests and responses to identified risks

45. Nicolas is a principal project manager managing a six-month project for his organization.
    This latest project pairs him with a project sponsor who is notorious for allowing scope
    creep to occur in her projects. For this reason, Nicolas is likely to place greater emphasis
    on what project management process?
    A. Plan Scope Management
    B.   Validate Scope
    C.   Control Scope
    D.   Control Quality
200         Chapter 6       Full-Length Practice Exam



 46. Sally is managing a project that will build a new data center to host various devices for
     customers. As part of selecting a vendor to manage tier 1 support, Sally schedules a series
     of meetings to answer questions from prospective vendors about the RFP published.
     Which of the following tools and techniques of the Conduct Procurements process does
     this describe?
      A. Bidder conferences
      B.   Advertising
      C.   Request for proposal
      D.   Buyer conferences

 47. Using the values noted within the following table, calculate the early start of activity D:

      Activity Name            Successor           Duration
      A                        B, C, D             2
      B                        E                   6
      C                        F                   4
      D                        F                   7
      E                        F                   3
      F                        G                   2
      G                        None                5

      A. 3
      B.   7
      C.   9
      D.   2

 48. A project sponsor assigns a project manager and signs a formal document authorizing
     activities to begin on a project. What project management process is being carried out?
      A. Develop Business Case
      B.   Develop Project Management Plan
      C.   Develop Project Charter
      D.   Develop Stakeholder Management Plan

 49. A risk manager looking to simulate the possible impacts to the project schedule of the
     combined effects of individual project risks is likely to use what type of data analysis
     technique?
      A. Sensitivity analysis
      B.   Decision tree analysis
                                          Chapter 6      Full-Length Practice Exam           201



    C.   Monte Carlo analysis
    D.   Influence diagrams

50. Predictive, iterative, incremental, and adaptive are all examples of what?
    A. Phase gates
    B.   Phase life cycles
    C.   Development life cycles
    D.   Plan-Do-Check-Act cycle

51. Fernando is a consultant hired to lead a six-month renovation of an office complex.
    Currently, he is closely developing and managing the team as they work to produce a set
    of key deliverables. In parallel, Fernando is also working with the company's procurement
    team to identify a vendor that will design new landscaping. These activities are associated
    with which project management process group?
    A. Initiating
    B.   Planning
    C.   Executing
    D.   Monitoring and Controlling

52. Which of the following statements represents the Monitoring and Controlling process
    group?
    A. It is where the project management plan is put into action.
    B.   It is where approved changes to the project are implemented to stay on track.
    C.   It is where project goals are formulated and revised to create the plan.
    D.   It is where project performance measurements are taken and analyzed.

53. If you know that EV = 250, PV = 300, and AC = 250, what are CPI and SPI, respectively?
    A. 1.0 and -1.2
    B.   1.0 and 1.2
    C.   1.0 and 0.83
    D.   1.0 and -0.83

54. Project managers typically apply project management best practices and standards to
    increase the success of their projects. How should a good project manager go about
    applying these practices?
    A. Exactly as documented within formally published standards
    B.   As documented by the organization they work within
    C.   Tailoring them based on existing variables
    D.   Using the processes documented within the PMBOK(R) Guide
202         Chapter 6      Full-Length Practice Exam



 55. Alfred, a project manager, pulled a peer aside to obtain advice on how to motivate his
     team to increase performance. Ron had a reputation for being able to get his team to
     deliver successfully. Alfred shared with Ron that he was recently able to get pay raises for
     most of his team, which helped performance for the first three weeks, but that it began
     faltering again. Ron advised that being paid fairly was an expectation of the team, not
     a motivator. Instead, he advised that Alfred find ways to challenge and develop team
     members individually to motivate them. What motivational theory is Ron advising that
     Alfred follow?
      A. Achievement Theory
      B.   Expectancy Theory
      C.   Maslow's Hierarchy of Needs
      D.   Hygiene Theory

 56. A project manager has developed and received sign-off of the scope, schedule, and cost
     baselines. To date, the project team has begun executing work and is now focused on
     ensuring that the work progresses according to the plan. What process is the team likely to
     perform next?
      A. Manage Project Knowledge
      B.   Control Schedule
      C.   Acquire Resources
      D.   Manage Communications

 57. A project manager has just received formal written notice that a large contract for their
     project has been completed. What activity is the project manager likely to perform next to
     wrap up the procurement?
      A. Continue monitoring their project
      B.   Perform administrative closure activities
      C.   Re-baseline the schedule
      D.   Send out a status report with the news

 58. A quality management team looking to ensure that the project is complying with
     organizational and project policies is likely to perform what activity?
      A. Problem-solve
      B.   Generate quality reports
      C.   Create an affinity diagram
      D.   Facilitate an audit

 59. Which of the following project management processes maintains or increases the efficiency
     and effectiveness of stakeholder engagement activities over time?
      A. Monitor Stakeholder Engagement
      B.   Manage Stakeholder Engagement
      C.   Control Stakeholder Engagement
      D.   Plan Stakeholder Engagement
                                        Chapter 6      Full-Length Practice Exam          203



60. The change control board recently approved two changes. This decision was generated
    as a result of carrying out the Perform Integrated Change Control process. What project
    management process will the project manager likely carry out next as a follow-up to the
    meeting?
    A. Manage Project Knowledge
    B.   Direct and Manage Project Work
    C.   Validate Scope
    D.   Control Quality

61. As part of managing communications, a project manager collects status from the project
    team. What key output are they hoping to generate?
    A. Work performance reports
    B.   Project communications
    C.   Updates to the project management plan
    D.   Change requests

62. Through which process group are resources acquired?
    A. Initiating
    B.   Planning
    C.   Executing
    D.   Monitoring and Controlling

63. At the conclusion of a planning meeting, a deployment manager stayed back and engaged
    in an animated conversation with the project manager, insisting that the work breakdown
    structure (WBS) that was shared during the meeting was incomplete. The deployment
    manager insisted that the WBS should reflect all activities of the project. What is the
    lowest level of the WBS?
    A. Planning packages
    B.   Work packages
    C.   Control accounts
    D.   Activities

64. Sally is managing a project that will build a new data center to host various devices for
    customers. As part of this project, Sally has worked with the procurement team to procure
    several materials and services needed. A team member expressed concern regarding the
    management of an order of servers. What key input can Sally reference to confirm when
    these resources should be available and what other terms are associated with the order?
    A. Schedule
    B.   Cost baseline
    C.   Agreement
    D.   Project management plan
204         Chapter 6      Full-Length Practice Exam



 65. A senior project manager is working on monitoring the progress of the schedule. To deter-
     mine whether performance is getting better or worse, he analyzes project performance
     over time. What technique is the project manager using?
      A. Trend analysis
      B.   What-if scenario analysis
      C.   Variance analysis
      D.   Performance reviews

 66. A project manager gearing up for a large-scale go-live event meets with the project sponsor
     to brainstorm ways of ensuring a smooth event. The sponsor encourages the project
     manager to spare no expense and to fly in the most critical resources to the main site
     where activities will occur. What technique is the sponsor recommending that the project
     manager use?
      A. Virtual teams
      B.   Team building
      C.   Colocation
      D.   Conflict management

 67. Who developed the quality theory that asks whether the product satisfies a real need, is
     safe, and meets the quality expectation?
      A. Crosby
      B.   Kaizen
      C.   Deming
      D.   Juran

 68. A risk manager has developed a plan for identifying and managing risks, facilitated
     multiple workshops to identify risks, and assessed the likelihood and impact of risks
     occurring. What is the risk manager likely to do next?
      A. Perform qualitative risk analysis
      B.   Perform quantitative risk analysis
      C.   Develop risk responses
      D.   Monitor risks identified

 69. Which of the following set of needs sits at the top of Maslow's Hierarchy of Needs?
      A. Self-esteem
      B.   Safety and security
      C.   Self-actualization
      D.   Social
                                          Chapter 6      Full-Length Practice Exam               205



70. The PMI Talent Triangle(R) focuses on three of the following key skill sets, except for
    which one?
    A. Technical discipline
    B.   Leadership
    C.   Strategic and business management
    D.   Technical project management

71. You assume that cost efficiency will continue to be the same for the duration of the
    project. If EV = 600, PV = 500, AC = 550, and BAC = 1,000, what is the estimate at
    completion (EAC)?
    A. 450
    B.   500
    C.   833
    D.   917

72. Julie is a senior project manager who has successfully completed multiple projects for
    her organization. When asked by a colleague what her secret weapon is, Julie notes
    communication and that she places emphasis on actively listening to the team, getting in
    front of conflicts early, and being well prepared for all team meetings. Which tool and
    technique is Julie describing?
    A. Emotional intelligence
    B.   Communication methods
    C.   Communication skills
    D.   Interpersonal and team skills

73. A project manager is in the process of tracking, reviewing, and reporting on overall
    progress of the project against the plan. All of the following are tools and techniques of
    the process this question refers to except for which one?
    A. Information management
    B.   Decision-making
    C.   Variance analysis
    D.   Meetings

74. Using the earned-value analysis technique, a project manager calculates a schedule
    performance index of 0.75 and a cost performance index of 1.25. To bring the schedule
    back on track, the project manager decides to allocate additional resources to critical
    activities to complete them faster. What project management process is he performing?
    A. Control Costs
    B.   Control Schedule
    C.   Develop Schedule
    D.   Monitor Risks
206         Chapter 6       Full-Length Practice Exam



 75. At the end of a project phase, Alfred facilitates a lessons-learned meeting to capture what
     went well and what could be improved. As an experienced project manager, Alfred has
     come to realize that capturing lessons learned throughout the project is important. What
     type of knowledge is Alfred capturing?
      A. Tacit
      B.   Explicit
      C.   Verbal
      D.   Formal

 76. Which of the following statements best describes the purpose of the Perform Integrated
     Change Control process?
      A. To track and monitor changes to the plan
      B.   To review and approve change requests submitted
      C.   To review, approve, and manage changes to the project
      D.   To evaluate performance and initiate changes as needed

 77. During a planning meeting, two architects debated which site should serve as a backup
     location, should the new solution fail. The project manager attempted to facilitate
     resolution, to no avail. As the conversation became heated, the project manager noted the
     time and moved on to the next agenda item. What conflict resolution technique did the
     project manager use?
      A. Compromise
      B.   Collaborate
      C.   Avoid
      D.   Smooth

 78. You are in the midst of performing the Sequence Activities process. You are currently
     identifying what the preferred and mandatory sequencing of activities are. What is this
     technique called?
      A. Dependency determination
      B.   Mandatory and discretionary dependencies
      C.   Precedence diagramming method
      D.   Arrow diagramming method

 79. Joan ran into a colleague at the office cafe and inquired about his project. Her colleague
     noted that, unfortunately, he and his sponsor had determined that the project had evolved
     into more of a support organization, and they had decided to close it out. He had since
     moved on to another project. What type of ending did Joan's colleague experience on
     his project?
      A. Integration
      B.   Starvation
      C.   Addition
      D.   Extinction
                                           Chapter 6      Full-Length Practice Exam               207



80. Using the values noted within the following table, calculate the late finish of activity F:

    Activity Name             Successor          Duration
    A                         B, C, D            2
    B                         E                  6
    C                         F                  4
    D                         F                  7
    E                         F                  3
    F                         G                  2
    G                         None               5

    A. 18
    B.   2
    C.   13
    D.   12

81. Which of the following statements best describes an individual project risk?
    A. The effect of uncertainty on the project as a whole, arising from all sources of
       uncertainty
    B.   An uncertain event or condition that, if it occurs, has a positive or negative effect on
         one or more project objectives
    C.   An event or condition that is certain that has a positive or negative effect on one or
         more project objectives
    D.   An uncertain event or condition that, if it occurs, has a negative effect on a project
         objective

82. You are a senior project manager working at a manufacturing plant that produces
    components used by the aviation industry. You are in the process of implementing
    approved changes. What process group do these process activities belong to?
    A. Initiating
    B.   Planning
    C.   Executing
    D.   Monitoring and Controlling

83. Collect Requirements, Define Scope, and Create WBS are processes that belong to what
    project management Knowledge Area?
    A. Project Integration Management
    B.   Project Schedule Management
    C.   Project Scope Management
    D.   Project Stakeholder Management
208         Chapter 6      Full-Length Practice Exam



 84. During a kick-off meeting for his project, Alfred had the project team members each share
     the city where they grew up as an icebreaker. His hope was to increase the comfort level
     of the team when interacting with each other. What stage of the team development model
     is the team currently in?
      A. Forming
      B.   Storming
      C.   Performing
      D.   Norming

 85. All of the following are true regarding the Monitor Communications process except for
     which one?
      A. It is the only communications-related process that belongs to the Monitoring and
         Controlling process group.
      B.   It is responsible for ensuring that the information needs of the project and its
           stakeholders are met.
      C.   It uses the stakeholder engagement assessment matrix to analyze the effectiveness of
           communication activities.
      D.   It generates work performance data to compare actual communication implemented
           against what was planned.

 86. A project manager is leading an effort to develop a new consumer device that is scheduled
     to go to market within the next six months. Recently, the team experienced a setback
     when a key set of stakeholders rejected a major deliverable. The primary complaint was
     that it did not meet the expectations discussed during the early stages of the project. What
     did the project manager fail to do in this scenario?
      A. Engage stakeholders
      B.   Control quality
      C.   Control scope
      D.   Control schedule

 87. A project manager is coordinating data center upgrades across five different locations
     dispersed around the globe. This involves sending team members to different locations and
     exposing them to various cultures that they may not be familiar with. The project manager
     therefore decides to hold cultural awareness and training for all team members involved
     in the project prior to scheduled travel. Which core value listed in the PMI Code of Ethics
     and Professional Conduct is the project manager addressing?
      A. Responsibility
      B.   Respect
      C.   Fairness
      D.   Honesty
                                           Chapter 6      Full-Length Practice Exam              209



88. A junior project manager sought out advice from a senior project manager after receiving
    concerning performance-based feedback from his manager. The junior project manager
    noted that team members had recently expressed that they did not feel up to date on the
    status of the project. The senior project manager asked if he had been measuring the
    effectiveness of communication activities. The junior project manager responded in the
    negative. What process did he fail to perform?
    A. Plan Communications Management
    B.   Manage Communications
    C.   Monitor Communications
    D.   Monitor and Control Project Work

89. You will consider factors such as the availability of resources, skill levels, training needs,
    and other elements when developing which of the following?
    A. Resource management plan
    B.   Staffing plan
    C.   Human resource management plan
    D.   Project staff assignments

90. A project manager is in the process of capturing new information and knowledge in the
    hopes of benefiting the project in future phases, as well as contributing to the overall
    organizational learning. What key output will the project manager generate as a result of
    these activities?
    A. Knowledge management
    B.   Networking
    C.   Lessons learned register
    D.   Information management

91. During a status meeting, the project sponsor expresses concern in ensuring that the
    team complete the project according to plan. He stresses that it is important that the
    team remain within the $55,000 budget. The sponsor then asks the project manager for
    a measure of cost performance that would be required in order for the team to meet his
    goal, assuming that current performance continues. In addition to the budget, the project
    manager already knows that the cumulative earned value is 30,000 and that they have
    spent 35,000 to date. What value will the project manager communicate to the sponsor?
    A. 1.00
    B.   1.25
    C.   0.75
    D.   0.80
210         Chapter 6      Full-Length Practice Exam



 92. All of the following are characteristics of a project-based organization except for
     which one?
      A. A project manager's authority is low.
      B.   It is a temporary structure put into place to perform the work of a project.
      C.   Project resources are released at the conclusion of the project.
      D.   A project manager may have direct reports.

 93. You work as a project manager for a large manufacturing company that produces dental
     supplies. Your latest project involves the installation of a new machine that will automate
     part of the manufacturing process. Currently, you are working with the project team to
     decompose identified deliverables into smaller components of work. What Knowledge
     Area does this activity belong to?
      A. Project Quality Management
      B.   Project Resource Management
      C.   Project Integration Management
      D.   Project Scope Management

 94. A project management office (PMO) organization held a weekly staff meeting for project
     managers to remain up to date on interdependent projects. During the meeting, Jill noticed
     that Ronald appeared withdrawn and quiet. She later learned that he was experiencing
     a high degree of stress, along with his team, as a result of his project closing. Which
     organizational structure does Ronald likely work in?
      A. Functional
      B.   Balanced Matrix
      C.   Project-oriented
      D.   Hybrid

 95. A project manager works closely with the organization's procurement manager for all
     services acquired externally for her project. Which process will they perform to manage
     the procurement relationships?
      A. Plan Procurement Management
      B.   Conduct Procurements
      C.   Control Procurements
      D.   Control Resources

 96. Ross is six months into a multi-year project. Since his assignment as project manager, he
     began the habit of periodically working with his project's leadership team to assess and
     analyze changes to the list of project stakeholders. This activity is associated with what
     project management process?
      A. Plan Stakeholder Engagement
      B.   Manage Stakeholder Engagement
                                            Chapter 6      Full-Length Practice Exam               211



     C.   Plan Resource Management
     D.   Identify Stakeholders

 97. All of the following statements about the final closing stages of a project are true except
     for which one?
     A. Costs and staffing taper off at this stage.
     B.   Overall project risk is at the lowest during this stage.
     C.   Stakeholders have the greatest influence at this stage.
     D.   The likelihood that the project will complete is highest at this stage.

 98. Midway through the delivery of development services, a customer requested that new
     requirements be incorporated. Because of the size and impact of the request, a change
     request was submitted and approved to the contract. What project management process
     will the approved changes be implemented in?
     A. Plan Procurement Management
     B.   Conduct Procurements
     C.   Perform Integrated Change Control
     D.   Control Procurements

 99. Using the following values, calculate estimate to complete (ETC), assuming that the work
     is progressing as planned: estimate at completion = 55,000, actual cost = 45,000, earned
     value = 40,000, planned value = 42,000.
     A. 15,000
     B.   10,000
     C.   13,000
     D.   12,000

100. What output of the Manage Team process includes updates made to the human resource
     management policies?
     A. Organizational process assets updates
     B.   Project management plan updates
     C.   Enterprise environmental factors updates
     D.   Project documents updates

101. This person developed statistical tools to examine when a corrective action must be
     applied to a process. He invented control chart techniques and was also the inventor of the
     Plan-Do-Check-Act cycle.
     A. Juran
     B.   Deming
     C.   Feigenbaum
     D.   Shewhart
212           Chapter 6      Full-Length Practice Exam



102. A risk manager convened with the project manager to discuss the progress of the project.
     The risk manager shared concerns about feedback received regarding the low likelihood
     that the team would achieve their go-live date successfully. What activity is the project
     manager likely to perform next?
      A. Submit a change request in the form of corrective action.
      B.    Work with the risk manager to apply immediate changes to the plan.
      C.    Nothing, since a new issue or risk has not been officially raised.
      D.    Submit a change request in the form of preventive action.

103. Project management closure activities occur through which of the following project
     management Knowledge Areas?
      A. Project Integration Management
      B.    Project Scope Management
      C.    Project Procurement Management
      D.    Project Quality Management

104. A project manager is working with the team to compare actual project performance
     against the plan and assessing whether any corrective or preventive actions are needed.
     These activities are associated with what process group?
      A. Initiating
      B.    Planning
      C.    Executing
      D.    Monitoring and Controlling

105. Based on the information presented in the following table, which of the projects should a
     project selection committee choose when using a weighted scoring model?


                                                       Project          Project    Project
      Criteria                          Weight         A score*         B score*   C score*

      Profit potential                  5              2                5          1

      Marketability                     3              5                2          2

      Ease to produce/support           1              1                2          5

      Weighted score                                   --               --         --
      *5 = highest


      A. Project A
      B.    Project B
                                           Chapter 6      Full-Length Practice Exam            213



     C.   Project C
     D.   None

106. A quality manager stresses the importance of managing quality to the project team
     during a planning meeting. The quality manager then performs a training session on
     various tools and techniques they will use, including Design for X, audits, and various
     diagrams. All of the following are true regarding activities associated with Manage
     Quality except for which one?
     A. Managing quality generates quality reports and test and evaluation documents.
     B.   Managing quality should occur throughout the project.
     C.   Managing quality occurs as part of monitoring and controlling the project.
     D.   Affinity diagrams, matrix diagrams, and scatter diagrams are all examples of tools
          used to manage quality.

107. Alice is a junior project manager who has struggled in her first job in this role. She has
     studied avidly and can recite the PMBOK(R) Guide processes but struggles when linking
     and speaking to how her projects realize the goals of the organization. What key skill set
     does Alice need to further develop?
     A. Technical discipline
     B.   Technical project management
     C.   Strategic and business management
     D.   Leadership

108. Midway through the delivery of development services, a customer requested that new
     requirements be incorporated. When asked to submit a change request to modify the terms
     of the contract, the customer refused and insisted that the changes be implemented at no
     cost. After multiple discussions, neither party changed their stance on the situation. What
     tool and technique will the project manager likely use to address this situation?
     A. Claims administration
     B.   Alternative dispute resolution
     C.   Inspection
     D.   Conflict management

109. All of the following processes belong to the Project Integration Management Knowledge
     Area except for which one?
     A. Manage Project Knowledge
     B.   Direct and Manage Project Work
     C.   Collect Requirements
     D.   Develop Project Management Plan
214         Chapter 6      Full-Length Practice Exam



110. Using the values noted within the following table, calculate the total float of activity C:

      Activity Name          Successor        Duration
      A                      B, C, D          2
      B                      E                6
      C                      F                4
      D                      F                7
      E                      F                3
      F                      G                2
      G                      None             5

      A. 0
      B.   4
      C.   2
      D.   5

111. During a weekly project management luncheon, a project manager confides to the
     group that he is struggling with the most critical stakeholders on his project. With the
     busy season underway, his greatest challenge has been getting engagement from the core
     group of leaders that he relies on to acquire resources. When asked if he had thought
     through and captured strategies for engaging his stakeholders, he admits that he has not
     completed that task. What did the project manager fail to do?
      A. Create a stakeholder register
      B.   Perform stakeholder analysis
      C.   Develop a communications management plan
      D.   Develop a stakeholder engagement plan

112. A project manager is in the process of developing the project management plan. What is
     a valid tool and technique that the project manager can use to bring various stakeholders
     into alignment on the various aspects of the plan?
      A. Data gathering
      B.   Interpersonal and team skills
      C.   Expert judgment
      D.   Meetings
                                          Chapter 6      Full-Length Practice Exam             215



113. You are a project manager for a web-based retail company. A deployment manager
     challenges your choice of project management methodologies. As the conversation heats
     up, you stress that your choice stems from having managed two similar large-scale
     projects in the past year. The deployment manager relents as a result and accepts your
     approach. What type of power did you use?
     A. Punishment
     B.   Legitimate
     C.   Expert
     D.   Referent

114. All of the following statements are true about types of project endings except
     which one?
     A. Addition is where a project evolves into ongoing operations.
     B.   Starvation can occur when a key resource quits.
     C.   Extinction can occur as a result of budget reduction.
     D.   Integration often occurs when resources are redistributed.

115. A project sponsor called the project manager to express concern over not seeing the latest
     weekly update on the progress of the project. What key output is the sponsor looking for?
     A. Work performance data
     B.   Work performance report
     C.   Work performance information
     D.   Communications management plan

116. Judy works for the You Name It! gaming company, which specializes in games for young
     adults. As part of her latest project, Judy is working with a team to develop a game using
     virtual reality technology. Judy and the team are now in the process of breaking down
     deliverables into smaller components of work, which will be used to estimate against.
     What valid input will Judy use to help her and the team get started?
     A. Requirements log
     B.   Requirements traceability matrix
     C.   Rolling wave planning
     D.   Scope baseline

117. All of the following are true regarding the Control Scope process except for which one?
     A. It is the process responsible for the formal acceptance of deliverables.
     B.   It belongs to the Monitoring and Controlling process group.
     C.   It generates work performance information and change requests.
     D.   It ensures that the project completes no more and no less than the planned scope.
216         Chapter 6         Full-Length Practice Exam



118. Using the following values, calculate cost variance (CV), and identify whether the project
     is over or under budget: earned value = 7,000, planned value = 6,000, actual cost = 5,000.
      A. 1,000 under budget
      B.   2,000 under budget
      C.   2,000 over budget
      D.   1,000 over budget

119. A project manager has just carried out quality control activities to verify the correctness of
     a series of deliverables produced. What project management process is the project manager
     likely to perform next?
      A. Validate Scope
      B.   Control Quality
      C.   Manage Quality
      D.   Control Scope

120. A project manager is in the process of confirming formal acceptance of the seller's work,
     finalizing open claims, and archiving lessons learned recently captured about the seller's
     performance. What project management process is the project manager performing?
      A. Conduct Procurements
      B.   Monitor and Control Project Work
      C.   Control Procurements
      D.   Close Project or Phase

121. Nicolas is in the process of overseeing the implementation of risk responses for risks that
     are being mitigated. As part of his approach, he references the plan that outlines the roles
     and responsibilities of team members for risk management. What document did Nicolas
     reference to get this information?
      A. Project management plan
      B.   Risk report
      C.   Risk register
      D.   Risk management plan

122. Which of the following processes will the project manager perform to verify the
     correctness of a completed deliverable?
      A. Validate Scope
      B.   Control Quality
      C.   Manage Quality
      D.   Control Scope
                                           Chapter 6      Full-Length Practice Exam             217



123. Alice is a junior project manager reporting to the development editor of a large publishing
     organization. In addition to her project management responsibilities, she is responsible for
     maintaining the department's finances. What type of organization structure does Alice
     work in?
     A. Project-oriented
     B.   Functional
     C.   Strong matrix
     D.   Balanced matrix

124. The Project Integration Management Knowledge Area is concerned with which of the
     following?
     A. Ensuring timely and appropriate planning, collection, creation, distribution, storage,
        retrieval, management, control, monitoring, and ultimate disposition of project
        information
     B.   Identifying, combining, unifying, and coordinating the various processes and project
          management activities
     C.   Identifying the people, groups, or organizations that could impact or be impacted by
          the project to analyze stakeholder expectations and their impact on the project
     D.   Ensuring the project includes all the work required, and only the work required, to
          complete the project successfully

125. Nicolas is a principal project manager managing a six-month project for his organization.
     During a status meeting, the director of development notes that he would like to see two
     additional features added to the project's deliverable. Nicolas hesitates and points out that
     the additional features are not in the scope for the project. The director waves him off and
     states that he could cover the costs if needed. Which of the following processes addresses
     this situation?
     A. Plan Scope Management
     B.   Validate Scope
     C.   Control Scope
     D.   Control Quality

126. During a change control meeting, the project manager summarizes the latest request
     submitted and reviews analysis and alternatives provided by the team. The sponsor, who
     had already reviewed the information prior to the meeting, notes that he approves the
     change request and the committee can move on to the next submission. What type of
     decision-making technique did the change control board use?
     A. Democratic
     B.   Unanimity
     C.   Plurality
     D.   Autocratic
218         Chapter 6       Full-Length Practice Exam



127. All of the following are true, except for which one?
      A. Mandatory dependencies are also known as hard logic or hard dependencies.
      B.   There are four types of logical relationships between activities: finish-to-finish, finish-
           to-start, start-to-start, and start-to-finish.
      C.   Start-to-finish is the most commonly used logical relationship between activities.
      D.   Precedence diagramming is the most commonly used diagramming method, and
           arrow diagramming the least.

128. New risks are identified primarily through which of the following processes?
      A. Identify Risks
      B.   Identify Risks and Monitor Risks
      C.   Monitor Risks
      D.   Identify Risks and Perform Qualitative Risk Analysis

129. Brad works as a project manager for a prominent law firm. His latest project involves an
     office move that will accommodate a 10 percent growth in staff over the next two years.
     Because of an unexpected increase in infrastructure costs, he calculates that he will be
     $2,000 over budget. What document can Brad reference to determine whether this falls
     within the allowable threshold for budget overages?
      A. Cost baseline
      B.   Cost management plan
      C.   Contingency reserve
      D.   Project funding requirements

130. All of the following are components that together form the scope baseline, except for
     which one?
      A. Work breakdown structure
      B.   Project scope statement
      C.   Work breakdown structure dictionary
      D.   Requirements log

131. Using the earned value analysis technique, a project manager calculates a schedule
     performance index of 0.75 and a cost performance index of 1.25. To bring the schedule
     back on track, the project manager decides to allocate additional resources to critical
     activities in order to complete them faster. What technique are they using to control the
     schedule?
      A. Fast tracking
      B.   Leads and lags
      C.   Crashing
      D.   Resource optimization
                                           Chapter 6      Full-Length Practice Exam            219



132. Elaine is a project manager juggling three projects at once. She struggles to stay on top of
     the many moving pieces, including communicating appropriately with such a large group.
     Not counting herself, Elaine's largest project has a total of 65 active stakeholders. How
     many communication channels exist in Elaine's largest project?
     A. 2,080
     B.   2,113
     C.   130
     D.   1,387

133. Which of the following project management documents contains the risk responses
     implemented as part of execution activities?
     A. Project management plan
     B.   Risk report
     C.   Risk register
     D.   Risk management plan

134. Which theorist suggested that humans have five basic needs arranged in hierarchical
     order?
     A. Frederick Herzberg
     B.   Abraham Maslow
     C.   Victor Vroom
     D.   David McClelland

135. A project manager facilitates the voting process for decision-makers who have convened to
     review a major deliverable that has been completed. The intent of the meeting is to vote on
     whether to approve and accept the deliverable. What key input will the committee need to
     reference to vote?
     A. Deliverables
     B.   Accepted deliverables
     C.   Verified deliverables
     D.   Work performance information

136. Recalls and project decisions can impact which of the following tools and techniques of
     the Plan Quality Management process?
     A. Seven Basic Quality Tools
     B.   Cost of quality
     C.   Cost-benefit analysis
     D.   Quality control measurements
220         Chapter 6         Full-Length Practice Exam



137. Which environmental factor should you pay close attention to when carrying out the
     Develop Project Management Plan process?
      A. Project management plan templates
      B.   Organizational structure, culture, and management practices
      C.   Historical information and lessons learned repository
      D.   Change control procedures

138. According to the PMBOK(R) Guide, this output of the Identify Risks process is used when
     implementing risk responses because it contains the overall project risk exposure, as well
     as the agreed-upon risk response strategy.
      A. Project management plan
      B.   Risk report
      C.   Risk register
      D.   Risk management plan

139. You are working on a project and are in the Plan Quality Management process. You know
     that if the customer requirements are not satisfied while the product is still under the
     control of the organization, it might result in corrective action, rework, scrapping, and
     downtime. Which of the following statements is true regarding the cost of quality?
      A. Cost of quality is an output of this process, and this is an internal failure cost.
      B.   Cost of quality is a tool and technique of this process, and this is a prevention cost.
      C.   Cost of quality is an output of this process, and this is a prevention cost.
      D.   Cost of quality is a tool and technique of this process, and this is an internal failure
           cost.

140. All of the following are tools and techniques of the Identify Stakeholders process except
     for which one?
      A. Interpersonal skills
      B.   Expert judgment
      C.   Data gathering
      D.   Meetings

141. Alfred leaned back and watched proudly as the team reported progress seamlessly during
     the daily standup meeting. Over the past two weeks, the team has been functioning as one
     entity. Which stage of the Tuckman team development ladder is the team currently in?
      A. Forming
      B.   Storming
      C.   Norming
      D.   Performing
                                            Chapter 6      Full-Length Practice Exam              221



142. Using the estimates provided, calculate the triangular distribution: most likely estimate
     (ML) = 72, optimistic estimate (O) = 55, pessimistic estimate (P) = 85. Round to one decimal
     point.
     A. 70.0
     B.   70.7
     C.   71.3
     D.   72

143. During a status meeting, the project sponsor requests an update on how much over or
     under budget the project is estimated to complete. On hand, you have the following
     information: BAC = 25,000, EAC = 32,000, ETC = 8,000. What value will you respond
     with?
     A. 24,000
     B.   17,000
     C.   33,000
     D.- 7,000

144. A project manager is in the process of carrying out activities associated with the Manage
     Quality process. What is the project manager hoping to achieve?
     A. To incorporate the organization's quality policies into the project and to translate the
        quality management plan into executable quality activities
     B.   To identify quality requirements and/or standards for the project and its deliverables
          and to document how the project will demonstrate compliance
     C.   To monitor and record the results of executing quality management activities
     D.   To manage quality activities of the project by assessing performance and ensuring
          outputs conform to customer expectations

145. Which of the following documents identifies 12 principles that are the focus of the Agile
     approach?
     A. Agile Credo
     B.   Agile Manifesto
     C.   Agile Practice Guide
     D.   Agile Standard

146. Jason is a well-liked project manager. Team members note that his positive attitude is
     contagious and his instinct for getting in front of issues is strong. As a result, individuals
     tend to vie for roles within Jason's projects. What type of power does Jason have in this
     scenario?
     A. Referent
     B.   Legitimate
     C.   Expert
     D.   Punishment
222         Chapter 6        Full-Length Practice Exam



147. Which of the following core values listed in the PMI Code of Ethics and Professional
     Conduct addresses conflict of interest?
      A. Responsibility
      B.   Respect
      C.   Fairness
      D.   Honesty

148. All of the following are tools and techniques of the Plan Communications Management
     process except for which one?
      A. Communication requirements analysis
      B.   Communication technology
      C.   Interpersonal and team skills
      D.   Project management information system

149. All of the following are stages of the Tuckman-Jensen team development model except for
     which one?
      A. Adjourning
      B.   Acting
      C.   Storming
      D.   Forming

150. Alyssa is managing a software development project with a compressed timeline. To
     compress the project work, she has opted to leverage a development team based in the
     United States, as well as another based in Vietnam. Although the team does not spend
     time meeting face to face, the benefits yield a 24-hour workday. What tool or technique is
     Alyssa using?
      A. Sensitivity analysis
      B.   Virtual team
      C.   Dependency determination
      D.   Interpersonal and team skills

151. A project sponsor calls the project manager to request a summary of project performance
     against objectives for the phase that was just completed. The project manager assures
     the sponsor that they are already in the process of putting the report together and that it
     will be provided by end of week. What project management process is the project manager
     performing?
      A. Direct and Manage Project Work
      B.   Monitor and Control Project Work
      C.   Manage Project Knowledge
      D.   Close Project or Phase
                                            Chapter 6       Full-Length Practice Exam        223



152. All of the following are true regarding the Conduct Procurements process except for
     which one?
     A. It is part of the Executing process group.
     B.   It belongs to the Procurement Management Knowledge Area.
     C.   A key output of the process is seller proposals.
     D.   Advertising is used to increase the list of potential sellers.

153. Sue is in the process of monitoring the progress of the project, which kicked off six
     months prior. Based on the latest work performance reports, she knows that the schedule
     performance index is 0.85 and the cost performance index is 0.70. To compress the
     schedule, what options can Sue consider?
     A. Crash critical activities.
     B.   Fast-track critical activities.
     C.   Fast-track and crash critical activities.
     D.   Fast-track activities on the short network path.

154. A project manager facilitates the voting process for decision-makers who have convened to
     review a major deliverable that has been completed. The intent of the meeting is to vote on
     whether to approve and accept the deliverable. What project management process are they
     performing?
     A. Validate Scope
     B.   Control Scope
     C.   Plan Scope Management
     D.   Manage Quality

155. Which of the following describes how a project or product attribute will be measured and
     verified?
     A. Quality management plan
     B.   Quality reports
     C.   Quality metric
     D.   Quality control measurements

156. A decision-making technique that is based on the largest block of votes within the group is
     known as what?
     A. Unanimity
     B.   Majority
     C.   Plurality
     D.   Autocratic
224         Chapter 6       Full-Length Practice Exam



157. Which of the following types of power stems from an individual's position?
      A. Referent
      B.   Legitimate
      C.   Expert
      D.   Punishment

158. A project manager is in the process of monitoring cost performance to determine whether
     any existing variances found against the plan are within the established tolerance levels.
     What technique can the project manager use to achieve the desired outcome?
      A. Reserve analysis
      B.   Trend analysis
      C.   Variance analysis
      D.   Earned-value analysis

159. A project manager performing activities associated with the Manage Quality process is
     utilizing the root-cause analysis technique. Which of the following best describes this
     technique?
      A. A technique that identifies options in order to select which quality approach is the
         most appropriate
      B.   A technique that determines the basic underlying reasons that result in a variance,
           defect, or risk
      C.   A technique that analyzes documents produced to identify processes that may be out
           of control
      D.   A technique that identifies opportunities for process improvements

160. During a tense meeting, a project manager had to step in and halt a conversation
     occurring between two engineers. The engineers were heatedly debating what technology
     to use, both insinuating a lack of trust in each other. Which stage of the Tuckman team
     development ladder is the team currently in?
      A. Forming
      B.   Storming
      C.   Norming
      D.   Performing

161. Which of the following best describes the scope of programs?
      A. To produce benefits to an organization by ensuring the outcomes of its components
         are delivered in a coordinated and complementary manner
      B.   To produce defined objectives that can be progressively elaborated throughout the
           project life cycle
      C.   To deliver strategic objectives of the organization, which may change and evolve over
           time
      D.   To produce the documented benefits of a project by ensuring the outcomes are
           delivered in a coordinated and complementary manner
                                          Chapter 6      Full-Length Practice Exam            225



162. A project sponsor calls the project manager to request a summary of project performance
     against objectives for the phase that was just completed. What is the sponsor requesting?
     A. Work performance report
     B.   Final report
     C.   Status report
     D.   Quality report

163. Grant hesitantly knocks on his project sponsor's door to notify her of a budget overage
     that has occurred. Because of a vendor error, he shared that a critical piece of equipment
     would cost $30,000 more than originally estimated. Fortunately for Grant, the sponsor
     understood the situation and approved the use of funds set aside for unexpected events.
     From where will Grant pull the funds to cover the equipment?
     A. Management reserves
     B.   Contingency reserves
     C.   Funding limit reconciliation
     D.   Cost baseline

164. Rhonda is a hands-on project sponsor who enjoys partnering with her project man-
     agers to motivate teams to deliver strong results. With her most seasoned project
     managers, Rhonda provides ideas and suggestions, while with her most junior project
     managers, she facilitates development sessions. What leadership theory does Rhonda
     subscribe to?
     A. Continuum Theory
     B.   Situational Leadership Theory
     C.   Contingency Theory
     D.   Theory Z

165. Which of the following represents the best type of project ending?
     A. Integration
     B.   Starvation
     C.   Addition
     D.   Extinction

166. The forcing conflict management technique is also known as what?
     A. Collaborating
     B.   Directing
     C.   Avoiding
     D.   Compromising
226         Chapter 6        Full-Length Practice Exam



167. Which of the following represents a benefit of using an Agile approach to manage projects?
      A. Changes can be closely monitored and controlled.
      B.   A project team can adjust processes in order to meet new or modified requirements.
      C.   Risks can be identified, reduced, or eliminated early on in the project life cycle.
      D.   The team is not distracted by planning activities and can focus on execution.

168. During a status meeting, a senior architect expressed concern about a recent change made
     to the functionality of the product being designed. As a member of the change control
     board, he did not have a chance to weigh in on the decision. The project manager noted
     that she would investigate the situation. What went wrong in this scenario?
      A. The change control board must have held an ad hoc meeting.
      B.   The change did not follow the change control process.
      C.   The senior architect is not up to speed on the project.
      D.   The project manager is not up to speed on the project.

169. A project manager has structured his project in a way that will allow for the planning
     of the project to occur during the early phases of the life cycle, with minimal changes
     thereafter. This approach is associated with which development life cycle?
      A. Iterative
      B.   Predictive
      C.   Adaptive
      D.   Incremental

170. Sue is in the process of monitoring the progress of a project, which kicked off six months
     prior. The sponsor of Sue's project requests an update on the expected total cost of
     completing the work. What information is the sponsor requesting?
      A. Estimate at completion
      B.   Estimate to complete
      C.   Budget at completion
      D.   To complete performance index

171. Which of the following diagrams used to control quality demonstrates total number of
     defects by source?
      A. Histograms
      B.   Control charts
      C.   Scatter diagrams
      D.   Cause-and-effect diagrams

172. Which quality theorist promoted the concept of doing it right the first time?
      A. Philip Crosby
      B.   Joseph Juran
      C.   Walter Shewhart
      D.   W. Edwards Deming
                                           Chapter 6      Full-Length Practice Exam           227



173. Which of the following is a valid input that a project manager can use to cultivate
     appropriate stakeholder involvement and interaction?
     A. Work performance data
     B.   Agreements
     C.   Communications management plan
     D.   Stakeholder engagement plan

174. A project manager is in the process of making changes to team assignments to optimize
     project performance. What activity is the project manager engaged in?
     A. Developing the team
     B.   Estimating resource requirements
     C.   Controlling resources
     D.   Managing the team

175. At the end of a project phase, Alfred facilitates a lessons-learned meeting to capture what
     went well and what could be improved. As an experienced project manager, Alfred has
     come to realize that capturing lessons learned throughout the project is important. During
     the meeting, one of the architects shares that he felt he had an "a-ha" moment but couldn't
     quite articulate the concept. What type of knowledge is the architect attempting to share?
     A. Tacit
     B.   Explicit
     C.   Verbal
     D.   Formal

176. A risk manager is preparing to perform a risk audit. As part of this activity, the risk
     manager requests the status of risk responses implemented and updates on identified risks.
     Which input of the Monitor Risks process is the risk manager requesting?
     A. Technical performance analysis
     B.   Work performance reports
     C.   Work performance information
     D.   Work performance data

177. Which of the following are the tools and techniques of the Plan Quality Management
     process?
     A. Expert judgment, data gathering, data analysis, decision-making, data representation,
        test and inspection planning, and meetings
     B.   Cost of quality, Seven Basic Quality Tools, benchmarking, design of experiments,
          additional quality planning tools, and meetings
     C.   Cost of quality, Seven Basic Quality Tools, design of experiments, statistical
          sampling, additional quality planning tools, and meetings
     D.   Cost-benefit analysis, cost of quality, Seven Basic Quality Tools, additional planning
          tools, and meetings
228         Chapter 6       Full-Length Practice Exam



178. Which of the following estimate ranges represents a rough order of magnitude?
      A.- 5% to + 10%
      B.- 50% to + 50%
      C.- 25% to + 75%
      D.- 10% to + 25%

179. A project manager is working with the project team to estimate durations for the identified
     project activities. The team is looking to achieve the most accurate estimate possible.
     What estimating technique can they use to generate the desired result?
      A. Parametric estimating
      B.   Analogous estimating
      C.   Bottom-up estimating
      D.   Three-point estimating

180. Which of the following leadership theories places emphasis on the well-being of employees
     both at work and outside of work and encourages steady employment?
      A. Theory X and Y
      B.   Situational Leadership Theory
      C.   Theory Z
      D.   Contingency Theory

181. During a change control meeting, the project sponsor takes suggestions and
     recommendations on the latest change request from the other three committee members,
     who all voted to accept the change request. The sponsor votes to reject the change, which
     is accepted as the final decision. What type of leadership style does the sponsor use?
      A. Laissez-faire
      B.   Autocratic
      C.   Democratic
      D.   Transactional

182. A project manager is tasked with managing a project that aims to achieve ISO compliance
     for their information security management system. Compliance lends the organization
     credibility mandated by enterprise user groups. Which of the following needs and
     demands represent the reason that the project came about?
      A. Legal requirement
      B.   Stakeholder demands
      C.   Technological advance
      D.   Business process improvement

183. All of the following are true regarding power types except for which one?
      A. Legitimate power is also known as formal, positional, or authoritative power.
      B.   Expert power is derived through one's knowledge, credentials, and/or education.
                                           Chapter 6      Full-Length Practice Exam           229



     C.   Using one's connections, alliances, and networking as a form of power is known as
          relational.
     D.   The use of punishment power should be avoided and never used.

184. A frequent sponsor of projects within a technology organization enjoyed a reputation
     for generating strong productivity from her team. She attributed these results to having
     a genuine concern about her team members and entrusting them with the responsibility
     of delivering results through limited supervision. According to Douglas McGregor, what
     management profile does this sponsor reflect?
     A. Theory X
     B.   Theory Y
     C.   Theory Z
     D.   Theory XY

185. Which of the following measurements reflects the value of the work completed to date as
     it compares to the authorized budgeted amount assigned to the work component?
     A. Actual cost
     B.   Planned value
     C.   Earned value
     D.   Budget at completion

186. All of the following make up the three key dimensions developed and monitored through
     earned value management except for which one?
     A. Planned value
     B.   Earned value
     C.   Actual cost
     D.   Budget at completion

187. As part of managing the project, a project manager carries out activities meant to ensure
     that project information is collected, disseminated, and stored in an effective and timely
     manner. What project management process is the project manager performing?
     A. Plan Communications Management
     B.   Monitor Communications
     C.   Manage Communications
     D.   Control Communications

188. Which leadership style reflects a leader that allows the team to drive decisions?
     A. Laissez-faire
     B.   Autocratic
     C.   Democratic
     D.   Transactional
230         Chapter 6       Full-Length Practice Exam



189. Thomas is responsible for coordinating activities that will deploy 10 new servers into an
     existing data center that his organization manages. Last year, he developed standards on
     how deployments should be handled. This will be his 10th deployment this month. Which
     of the following best describes Thomas's work?
      A. Project
      B.   Operations
      C.   Program
      D.   Portfolio

190. Brad works as a project manager for a prominent law firm. His latest project involves an
     office move that will accommodate a 10 percent growth in staff over the next two years.
     Because of an unexpected increase in infrastructure costs, a risk accepted by the team, he
     calculates that he will be $2,000 over budget. After consulting with the project sponsor,
     Brad decides to dip into additional funding set aside to account for risks that have
     materialized. Where will Brad obtain these funds?
      A. Management reserves
      B.   Contingency reserves
      C.   Funding limit reconciliation
      D.   Cost baseline

191. A project manager is addressing issues occurring among team members related to
     the execution of the work. What project management process is the project manager
     performing?
      A. Develop Team
      B.   Plan Resource Management
      C.   Manage Team
      D.   Control Resources

192. Which of the following contract types presents the greatest risk to the seller?
      A. Time and material
      B.   Cost-reimbursable
      C.   Fixed price
      D.   Fixed price with economic price adjustments

193. A quality manager is inspecting a subset of deliverables produced in order to measure
     controls and verify quality. Which of the following is a valid tool or technique to assist the
     project manager in performing this activity?
      A. Statistical sampling
      B.   Root-cause analysis
      C.   Questionnaires and surveys
      D.   Check sheets
                                          Chapter 6      Full-Length Practice Exam            231



194. You are a project manager working on manufacturing a new product. The operational
     process is very detailed. One of the components of the product must measure 1 centimeter
     by 1 centimeter. Reliability is measured using a machine that samples one part in every
     hundred to assure the measurements are correct. Which of the following does this
     question describe?
     A. This is statistical sampling, which is a tool and technique of the Control Quality
        process.
     B.   This describes a quality baseline, which is an output of the Plan Quality Management
          process.
     C.   This describes a quality audit, which is a tool and technique of the Plan Quality
          Management process.
     D.   This is a prevention cost, which is a tool and technique of the Plan Quality
          Management process.

195. Which of the following motivational theorists suggested that individuals are motivated by
     two factors: hygiene factors and motivators?
     A. Frederick Herzberg
     B.   Abraham Maslow
     C.   Victor Vroom
     D.   David McClelland

196. You know the following information: BAC = 300, PV = 200, EV = 250, and AC = 250.
     Which of the following is the correct expected total cost at completion if CPI and SPI
     influence the remaining work?
     A. 290
     B.   300
     C.   250
     D.   340

197. Ron's latest project pairs him with the most tenured development director in the
     company as his project sponsor. Ron knew this would be a challenging project based
     on the director's reputation for punitive action when individual team members didn't
     deliver, regardless of the reason. Based on McGregor's Theory of X and Y, which style of
     leadership does the director practice?
     A. Theory X
     B.   Theory Y
     C.   Theory Z
     D.   Theory X and Y
232         Chapter 6      Full-Length Practice Exam



198. An advertising firm recently hired a project manager to lead integration efforts in a recent
     acquisition made by the company. The acquisition earned the advertising firm recognition
     as the largest firm operating within their respective region. Which of the following needs
     and demands represent the reason that the project came about?
      A. Competitive Forces
      B.   Political Changes
      C.   Strategic Opportunity
      D.   Business Process Improvement

199. Using the estimates provided, calculate the beta distribution: Most likely estimate
     (ML) = 72, optimistic estimate (O) = 55, pessimistic estimate (P) = 85. Round to one decimal
     point.
      A. 70.0
      B.   70.7
      C.   71.3
      D.   72

200. During a project kick-off meeting, the project manager reviews the project management
     plan with the project team, signaling the start of execution activities. What is the
     significance of the project management plan?
      A. It captures, tracks, and addresses project benefits identified in the benefits
         management plan.
      B.   It authorizes the use of the approved budget and contingency reserves.
      C.   It authorizes the assignment of resources to activities identified in the schedule.
      D.   It defines how the project is executed, monitored and controlled, and closed.
Answers Appendix
234        Answers Appendix




Chapter 1: Initiating (Domain 1.0)
  1. B. The business case is an economic feasibility study used to understand the business need
     for the project and determine whether the investment is worthwhile. In short, it justifies
     the need for the project and contains information such as the project description, high-
     level description of scope, analysis of the problem, financial analysis, and success factors.

  2. B. Linear, multi-objective programming, and nonlinear are all examples of constrained
     optimization methods, not benefit measurement methods. Benefit measurement methods
     include benefit-cost ratio analysis, scoring models, and benefit contribution methods.

  3. B. Carina is in the process of carrying out the Identify Stakeholders process. Although
     the project has been active for three months, it is customary to perform this process
     iteratively, especially at the start of a phase.

  4. A. The scenario describes the early stages of a project, which has just been selected and a
     project manager assigned. This occurs in the Initiating process group.

  5. A. The Plan-Do-Check-Act cycle was developed by Shewhart and later refined by
     Deming. It reflects the iterative, results oriented, and interactive nature of the project
     process groups.

  6. B. According to the PMBOK(R) Guide, the three types of PMOs are directive, supportive,
     and controlling.

  7. C. The Agile Manifesto identifies 12 principles that describe the Agile approach. It came
     about through a group of software developers who came together in 2001 to formalize the
     Agile approach.

  8. D. Agreements is an input, not a tool or technique, of the Identify Stakeholders
     process. Tools and techniques include the following: expert judgment, data gathering
     (questionnaires and surveys and brainstorming), data analysis (stakeholder analysis,
     document analysis), data representation (stakeholder mapping/representation), and
     meetings.

  9. B. Stakeholders have the greatest chance of influence over the project and the
     characteristics of the product, service, or results of the project in the early phases of the
     project, not the end. All other statements are true.

 10. A. In a weak-matrix organization, the project manager has a low degree of authority,
     which can be viewed as a disadvantage.

 11. C. According to PMI, a good project manager spends up to 90 percent of his time
     communicating. Communication skills are essential for a successful project manager.

 12. B. The scenario describes activities associated with the Acquire Resources and Conduct
     Procurements processes, which are processes that belong to the Executing process group.

 13. B. Carina is performing activities associated with the Planning process group.
                                                  Chapter 1: Initiating (Domain 1.0)             235



14. B. Phase endings are characterized by the completion, review, and approval of a
    deliverable.

15. D. Problem-solving involves asking questions to separate the causes of the problem from
    the symptoms. Decision-making involves considering alternative solutions to the problem.
    Choices are made from among the alternatives. Timing is important in decision-making,
    because good decisions made too soon or too late can turn into inferior solutions.

16. A. The PMBOK(R) Guide describes 49 project management processes that can be grouped
    in five process groups, which are as follows: Initiating, Planning, Executing, Monitoring
    and Controlling, and Closing.

17. B. Remember that all questions on the exam will refer to specific terminology used in the
    PMBOK(R) Guide. Although the other options presented may seem correct, the PMBOK(R)
    Guide calls this process stage gates, phase reviews, phase gates, phase exit, or kill points.

18. C. Sue is describing organizational project management (OPM). The PMBOK(R) Guide
    defines OPM as a framework in which portfolio, program, and project management are
    integrated with organizational enablers to achieve strategic objectives.

19. B. Direct and Manage Project Work, Manage Quality, and Conduct Procurements are
    three of the ten processes that make up the Executing process group.

20. A. The PMBOK(R) Guide defines a stakeholder as "an individual, group, or organization
    that may affect, be affected by, or perceive itself to be affected by a decision, activity, or
    outcome of a project."

21. C. Joe is correct. The project manager is responsible for managing and performing
    activities relating to Project Integration Management.

22. A. Hybrid organizations are a combination of various organizational types and typically
    involve a project-oriented structure coexisting within a functional organization.

23. A. A megaproject is defined as a large multi-year project that costs more than $1 billion
    and affects 1 million or more people.

24. A. Within a project-oriented organization, the project manager has a high degree of
    authority, and projects are treated with priority. A project manager has high to almost
    total resource access/availability, since team members are often dedicated to the project.

25. D. The project charter authorizes the project to begin. Once approved, it gives the project
    manager authority to apply resources to the project.

26. C. The project manager is utilizing their strategic and business management skills, which
    is one of three categories of skill set that make up the PMI Talent Triangle(R). The other
    two are technical project management and leadership.

27. C. Negotiation is working with others to come to an agreement. Arbitration and
    mediation are two forms of negotiation.
236        Answers Appendix



 28. B. Carina is concluding major activities associated with the Planning process group and
     is getting ready to enter into Executing. At this point in the project life cycle, costs are
     typically low.

 29. B. Project management is defined as the application of knowledge, skills, tools, and
     techniques to project activities to meet the project requirements.

 30. C. The Monitoring and Controlling process group is where project performance
     measurements are taken and analyzed to determine whether the project is progressing
     according to the plan.

 31. B. The project manager has performed activities associated with the Define Activities
     process and is now performing activities from the Sequence Activities process. Both of
     these processes belong to the Project Schedule Management Knowledge Area.

 32. D. The Closing process group encompasses only one process, not Initiating. Initiating has
     a total of 2 processes, Planning a total of 24, Executing a total of 10, and Monitoring and
     Controlling a total of 12.

 33. C. Organizational structures are the forms that an organization can take and their
     influence on projects. They describe the style, culture, and way of communicating that
     influence how project work is performed.

 34. D. The project manager is in the process of carrying out stakeholder analysis and is
     evaluating the level of interest and influence of stakeholders. In this scenario, the project
     manager is carrying out the Identify Stakeholders process.

 35. B. General management skills are likely to affect project outcomes. Estimating Costs
     is part of the Planning process group, and Control Costs is part of the Monitoring and
     Controlling process group. PMI requires either a degree or a certain number of years of
     experience in project management to sit for the exam, along with other requirements.

 36. D. The scenario presented describes the Plan Resource Management process, which
     belongs to the Project Resource Management Knowledge Area. Other processes belonging
     to this Knowledge Area include Estimate Activity Resources, Acquire Resources, Develop
     Team, Manage Team, and Control Resources.

 37. C. The project charter not only authorizes the existence of a project but also provides
     the project manager with authority to begin applying organizational resources to project
     activities.

 38. C. The collective phases a project progresses through are known as the project life
     cycle.

 39. A. There are three categories of skill sets that make up the PMI Talent Triangle(R): business
     management and strategic skills, technical project management skills, and leadership
     skills. Business management and strategic skills encompasses a project manager being
     able to describe the business needs of the project and how they align with the
     organization's goals.
                                                 Chapter 1: Initiating (Domain 1.0)             237



40. A. Project A has the highest score based on the values provided. To calculate the score for
    each project, multiply the score of each criterion against the weight of the criteria and then
    add up all of the scores. See the following table for the calculations:

     Criterion         Weight Project A Project A Project B Project B Project C Project C
                              score     totals    score     totals    score     totals
     Profit potential 5         5          25         2           10         1          5
     Marketability     1        1          1          5           5          3          3
     Ease of use       3        2          6          3           9          5          15
     Weighted score --          --         32         --          24         --         23

41. D. Influencing entails the ability to get things done using power and politics. Power is the
    ability to get people to do things they wouldn't ordinarily do, and it's the ability to change
    minds and influence outcomes. Politics involve getting groups of people with diverse
    interests to cooperate creatively, even in the midst of conflict and disorder.

42. B. Tailoring concerns determining which project management processes to use when
    managing and conducting the project.

43. B. Examples of enterprise environmental factors that are used in the Identify Stakeholders
    process are company culture, organizational structure, governmental or industry
    standards, global trends, and geographic locations of resources and facilities. The other
    options included are organizational process assets.

44. B. The question describes a hybrid organizational type, likely a mixture of a weak and a
    strong matrix. A clue is that your title is project manager, which does not typically exist
    in a purely functional organization; another is that the functional manager manages the
    project budget, which is not typical in a project-oriented or PMO organizational type.

45. B. Enterprise environmental factors are the factors both internal and external to the
    organization that can influence the project. Marketplace conditions is one example, as are
    organizational culture, structure, and governance. Enterprise environmental factors is a
    frequent input of the project management processes.

46. A. The Initiating processes are characterized by low costs, low staffing levels, decreased
    chances for a successful completion, high risk, and the greatest amount of stakeholder
    influence concerning the characteristics of the product or service of the project. Initiating
    acknowledges that the project or next phase of the project should begin and authorizes the
    assignment of resources.

47. B. Projects with NPV greater than 0 should be recommended; the key determining factor
    in selecting Project Fun is that the NPV is positive. Had both NPVs been positive, then
    the determining factor would have been the greater NPV number, since the scenario notes
    that funding exists for only one project.
     Payback period is considered the least precise selection method and is not typically the
     sole determining factor.
238        Answers Appendix



 48. B. The salience model uses three elements in analyzing stakeholders: power, urgency, and
     legitimacy. This is a data representation technique of the Identify Stakeholders process.

 49. C. Plan Schedule Management, Estimate Activity Durations, and Control Schedule
     are processes that belong to the Project Schedule Management Knowledge Area. Other
     processes belonging to this Knowledge Area include Define Activities, Sequence Activities,
     and Develop Schedule.

 50. A. There are three categories of skill set that make up the PMI Talent Triangle(R): business
     management and strategic skills, technical project management skills, and leadership
     skills.

 51. D. Project phases generally produce at least one deliverable by the end of the phase.

 52. C. There are four development life cycles: predictive, iterative, incremental, and hybrid.
     The incremental development life cycle uses predetermined periods of time called
     iterations to complete the deliverable (not to be confused with the iterative development
     life cycle).

 53. A. While PMOs may facilitate the selection of projects that support a company's strategic
     objectives, they are not typically responsible for establishing the objectives and selecting
     projects. All other options describe the types of support that a PMO typically offers
     within an organization.

 54. C. The Project Scope Management Knowledge Area has six processes that cover the
     Planning and Monitoring and Controlling process groups.

 55. D. The project manager is in the process of carrying out the Identify Stakeholders
     process. The stakeholder register, the primary output, captures the list of stakeholders and
     documents information about them, including any assessment information.

 56. A. Change-drive life cycles are also known as Agile or adaptive life cycles.

 57. A. Since you are in the early stages of the project and have just kicked off the Identify
     Stakeholders process, the stakeholder register would not yet be available; instead, you are
     in the process of developing the register. Agreements and business case, on the other hand,
     are both inputs to the Identify Stakeholders process (the business case through "business
     documents" input) and is the best choice.

 58. D. During the Planning phase of the project life cycle, stakeholder influence tends to be
     high, although it is highest during Initiating; costs, staffing, and chances for successful
     project completion tend to be low during Planning.

 59. D. Since the marketing company where Bill works is a customer of Reasons to Lyv, the
     project being managed within his organization is a result of a customer request.

 60. A. The title Project Coordinator indicates this is a weak matrix organization and that you
     are working within one of the business units rather than under the PMO (as you would if
     you were in a strong matrix organization). The question also states that the work of the
     project has begun, so you are in the Executing phase of the project.
                                                 Chapter 1: Initiating (Domain 1.0)               239



61. C. As the project progresses, you should use different techniques to perform these
    processes, including using different techniques to motivate, lead, and coach. The
    techniques you'll use will depend on the makeup of the project team and the stakeholders
    involved in that stage. The processes in this Knowledge Area concern human and material
    resources, and they consist of Plan Resource Management, Acquire Resources, Develop
    Team, Manage Team, and Control Resources.

62. D. Fast-tracking is the best answer in this scenario. Budget was the original constraint on
    this project, so it's highly unlikely the project manager would get more resources to assist
    with the project. The next best thing is to compress phases to shorten the project duration.

63. B. The Project Cost Management Knowledge Area technique used when evaluating
    various alternatives is called life-cycle costing. This technique considers acquisition,
    operating, and disposal costs.

64. C. Answer C is stated backwards. IRR is the discount rate when NPV equals zero.

65. D. Project selection methods include benefit measurement methods and mathematical
    models (also known as constrained optimization methods). Benefit measurement methods
    might include cost-benefit analysis and cash flow analysis.

66. C. According to the PMBOK(R) Guide, projects are initiated by business leaders because
    of the following categories or factors: regulatory compliance, legal requirements, or
    social requirements; stakeholder needs and requests; changing technology needs of the
    organization; create or improve processes, services, or products.

67. A. A positive value for NPV means the project will earn a return at least equal to or
    greater than the cost of capital. Since NPV for Alternative A is positive, this alternative
    will earn at least a 12 percent return.

68. B. Project selection methods are used prior to the Develop Project Charter process to
    choose which projects the organization should undertake or to choose among alternative
    ways of doing a project. According to the PMBOK(R) Guide, the project manager is not
    involved in project selection.

69. B. Project Scope Management is concerned with product scope and project scope. Product
    scope is concerned with the characteristics of the product or service of the project and is
    measured against the project requirements. Project scope is concerned with the work of
    the project and is measured against the project plan.

70. B. Identify Stakeholders belongs to the Project Stakeholder Management Knowledge
    Area. The Project Integration Management Knowledge Area contains the following
    processes: Develop Project Charter, Develop Project Management Plan, Direct and
    Manage Project Work, Manage Project Knowledge, Monitor and Control Project Work,
    Perform Integrated Changed Control, Close Project or Phase.

71. C. Payback period is the least precise of all cash flow calculations, so you shouldn't give
    this a lot of consideration if NPV is positive and IRR is greater than 0. Since Project B and
    Project D both have a negative NPV, they shouldn't be chosen. Project C has a higher IRR
    value than Project A and should be the project you choose, even though its payback period
    is longer than that of Project A.
240        Answers Appendix



 72. D. Portfolio management groups projects, programs, portfolios, and other work that
     is similar in scope and weighs the value of each project against the business's strategic
     objectives. Portfolio management also monitors projects to make certain they adhere
     to the objectives and make efficient use of resources. Portfolio management is usually
     handled by a senior manager with many years of experience in project and program
     management.

 73. D. NPV and IRR will generally bring you to the same accept/reject decision.

 74. A. The new series is unique and hasn't been done before. There is a definite end date--
     sweeps week in November--and the beginning date was the start of the project creation.
     After the series has started, the project itself is over, and the series becomes an ongoing
     operation.

 75. A. The Project Stakeholder Management Knowledge Area is concerned with identifying
     all of the stakeholders, analyzing their expectations, assessing how they can be impacted
     or are impacted by the project, and developing strategies to effectively engage them.

 76. C. The producer is the project sponsor because the question states that he is the final
     decision-maker for all questions that arise on the project. He also created the budget,
     implying he has the authority to spend money on the project.

 77. C. Antwon is performing portfolio management activities. Portfolio management is
     defined as the centralized management of one or more portfolios to achieve strategic
     objectives; it involves guiding the investment decisions of the organization to meet the
     organization's strategic goals.

 78. A. Although the lessons learned register is a tempting choice and is an artifact of the
     project, the correct answer is organizational process assets. Organizational process assets
     are the organization's policies, guidelines, processes, procedures, plans, approaches, and
     standards for conducting work, including project work. They are a frequent input to the
     project management processes.

 79. A. Estimate Activity Resources is a process that belongs to the Project Resource
     Management Knowledge Area. All other statements are true.

 80. C. Weighted scoring models use the weight of the criteria multiplied by the score to derive
     an overall score. Project 1's score is 47, Project 2's score is 45, and Project 3's score is 42.
     Based on this information, Project 1 is the best choice.

 81. C. Directive PMOs tend to have a high degree of control over projects, with project
     managers assigned by and directly reporting to the PMO. The PMO typically controls
     and manages projects directly.

 82. A. Economic models are an example of a benefit measurement method, not a constrained
     optimization method. These are project selection techniques that can be used to measure
     the advantages or merits of the product of the project.

 83. D. Benefit-cost ratio can be referred to as cost-benefit analysis. It is a common benefit
     measurement method that compares the cost to produce the product, service, or result of
     the project to the benefit that the organization will receive after executing the project.
                                                Chapter 1: Initiating (Domain 1.0)             241



84. D. Projects are temporary endeavors undertaken to produce a unique product, service,
    or result. Operations, on the other hand, are ongoing and repetitive and do not have an
    ending date.

85. B. Project Communications Management involves every member of the project team,
    including all the stakeholders. Everyone involved in the project will send or receive
    project information or both. Project Resources involve all the human and physical
    resources assigned to the work of the project. Although all the folks working on the
    project are involved, only the project manager and perhaps a few others are involved in
    performing the processes within this Knowledge Area.

86. C. Roshoud and Sally are performing the Plan Resource Management process, where
    roles and responsibilities are identified and documented, which is a process that belongs to
    the Project Resource Management Knowledge Area.

87. B. The formula for present value is PV = FV / (1 + i)n. Plugging in the information from
    the question, the formula becomes $8,000 / (1 + .07)3 = $6,530.

88. A. Brainstorming is a form of data gathering, a technique of the Develop Project Charter
    process. Other examples of data gathering include focus groups and interviews.

89. D. The project manager and project team together are responsible for determining how
    best to tailor the project management processes, based on the needs of the project.

90. A. According to the PMBOK(R) Guide, phase reviews are also called phase gate, phase
    entrance, phase exit, stage gate, and kill point. Phase reviews typically serve as
    checkpoints at the end of a phase where performance or progress is evaluated against
    the p
         roject charter or plan. Once completed, the project progresses to the next phase.

91. A. This came about because of a business need. Staff members were spending
    unproductive hours converting information, causing the company loss. The time the
    employees spent converting the information could have been spent doing something more
    productive.

92. B. According to the PMBOK(R) Guide, there are three ways project life cycle phases could
    be performed: sequential, iterative, and overlapping.

93. D. As a project manager, it is important for you to establish relationships with the
    stakeholders. Project Stakeholder Management is concerned with identifying all of the
    stakeholders on the project and assessing their needs, expectations, and involvement on
    the project.

94. B. This question requires discounted cash flow analysis to compare the value of
    Alternative A to Alternative B. Applying the present value formula to Alternative A, the
    formula is calculated this way: $21,000,000 / (1 + .05)2 = $19,047,619. Alternative B is
    calculated this way: $29,000,000 / (1 + .05)3 = $25,051,831.

95. B. The 10 project management Knowledge Areas bring processes together that have
    commonalities. For example, the Project Quality Management Knowledge Area includes
    the Plan Quality Management, Manage Quality, and Control Quality processes.
242        Answers Appendix



 96. D. The project charter identifies the purpose of the project and the project or product
     description. It includes a summary budget and summary milestone schedule. A detailed
     project schedule is not part of the project charter.

 97. A. IRR is the discount rate when the present value of the cash inflows equals the original
     investment. Project C's original investment equals the present value of its cash inflows at a
     discount rate of 7 percent. Therefore, Project A has the highest IRR and should be chosen
     above the other two.

 98. C. The project will recoup its investment by month 18. To calculate, simply total the cash
     inflow for every quarter as indicated; payback is reached when you hit the amount of total
     investment.

 99. D. There isn't enough information in this question to determine an answer. Payback
     period is the least precise of cash flow analysis techniques, but in this question, the
     payback periods are all the same. Initial investment isn't enough information to help
     choose among the projects.

100. B. Iterations are also known as sprints. Iterations or sprints are always time-bound and
     can be any short period of time defined and agreed upon by the team.

101. B. A highly predictive (Waterfall) life cycle typically has detailed specifications, while a
     highly adaptive life cycle (Agile) has requirements that are progressively elaborated. All
     other statements are true.

102. C. The project manager is using a highly adaptive (Agile) life cycle, where Closing
     activities involve addressing the highest business value items first, versus closing out the
     project or phase as in a highly predictive life cycle.

103. B. The project is being driven by legal requirements. New projects can occur as a result of
     laws passed, as in the case seen in this scenario.

104. B. The question describes activities associated with risk management. Kaylee and Alyssa
     are determining how best to address a positive risk (opportunity) that has been identified.

105. C. Agile project management is a method of managing projects in small, incremental
     portions of work that can be easily assigned, easily managed, and completed within a
     short period of time.

106. B. In an Agile life cycle, Planning activities involve the progressive elaboration of scope,
     based on continuous feedback from stakeholders.

107. D. The business analyst and the project manager have carried out activities relating
     to the following processes: Collect Requirements, Define Scope, and Create WBS.
     These processes belong to the Project Scope Management Knowledge Area. Project
     Requirements Management is not an official Knowledge Area.

108. A. There are three series of project life cycles within the basic framework for managing
     projects: sequential, iterative, and overlapping. In a sequential life cycle, one phase must
     finish before the next phase can begin.
                                                   Chapter 1: Initiating (Domain 1.0)            243



109. C. The product owner speaks on behalf of the business unit, customer, or end user, and is
     therefore considered to be the voice of the customer. The product owner represents the stake-
     holders and is the liaison between stakeholders, the scrum master, and the development team.

110. A. Ron is a scrum master. In Agile project management, the scrum master coordinates the
     work of the sprint and runs interference between the team and any distractions that may
     keep them from the work at hand. They also support the product owner in maintaining
     the backlog, prioritizing work, and defining when work is done.

111. B. In a highly adaptive life cycle, changes are welcome. Feedback is continuously obtained
     from stakeholders.

112. C. Progressive elaboration is not necessarily a deferral in planning; it refers to progressively
     determining the characteristics of the product, service, or result incrementally, as more
     detail becomes available.

113. A. Payback period is considered to be the least precise project selection method.

114. C. A burn-down chart shows the time remaining for the sprint and displays the time
     period of the sprint on the horizontal axis and the backlog items on the vertical axis.

115. A. Supportive PMOs tend to have a low degree of control over projects and play more
     of a consultative role to projects. Typically, a supportive PMO provides best practices,
     templates, training, and other resources to support projects.

116. C. Costs are highest during the Executing phase of the project life cycle, when resource
     usage is at its highest.

117. C. Because Reasons to Lyv is attempting to exploit new GPS technology that is available,
     the project is a result of technological advance.

118. D. Agile project management is a methodology that manages projects through iterations
     of work; it allows the team to quickly adapt to new requirements and allows for continual
     assessment of goals, deliverables, and functionality of the product, service, or result of the
     project.

119. A. Project Requirements Management is not a formal Knowledge Area. The following
     represent the 10 project management Knowledge Areas: Project Integration Management,
     Project Scope Management, Project Schedule Management, Project Cost Management,
     Project Quality Management, Project Resource Management, Project Communications
     Management, Project Risk Management, Project Procurement Management, and Project
     Stakeholder Management.

120. C. Fast-tracking refers to compressing or shortening the project schedule. In this scenario,
     you are attempting to compress the phase.

121. C. Project Integration, Scope, and Cost Management are examples of project
     management Knowledge Areas. There are a total of 10 Knowledge Areas described within
     the PMBOK(R) Guide.
244         Answers Appendix



122. B. Waterfall, Agile, and PRINCE2 are examples of methodologies used to manage
     projects.

123. A. Stakeholders often have conflicting interests, which can generate conflict. It is the
     project manager's responsibility to understand these conflicts and try to resolve them.

124. D. The question describes a daily stand-up, also referred to as a daily scrum meeting.
     These meetings are typically held at the same time and place every day and are time boxed
     to typically no more than 15 minutes. The purpose is to keep the team informed and alert
     the scrum master of any obstacles in the way of completing tasks.

125. D. Within the Agile methodology, a sprint or iteration refers to a short, time-bound
     period of work, which always starts with a sprint-planning meeting. It is also known as an
     iteration.

126. B. Project management Knowledge Areas bring together processes that have
     characteristics in common, such as processes that relate to the topic of risk management,
     which would form the Project Risk Management Knowledge Area.

127. B. Sue is referring to leadership skills, which is one of the categories of skill set that
     make up the PMI Talent Triangle(R). The PMBOK(R) Guide describes leadership as the
     knowledge, skills, and behaviors needed to guide, motivate, and direct a team to help an
     organization achieve its business goals.

128. D. Project 1's payback period is 19 months. Year 1 inflows are $528,000. Year 2 inflows
     are $39,000 per month-making the total payback period 19 months. Project 2's payback
     period is 16 months. Year 1 inflows are $72,000. Year 2 inflows are $45,000 per month,
     which makes the payback period 16 months.

129. B. The question describes a sprint retrospective meeting, which helps the team plan for
     the next sprint and determine overall progress.

130. D. A project is considered successful when it achieves its objectives and stakeholder needs
     and expectations are met.

131. D. The project life cycle refers to all of the collective phases that the project progresses
     through, from start to finish. Project life cycles are the same for all projects, despite their
     complexity or size.

132. D. The best answer to this question is D. This is a high-risk project, and a feasibility
     study should be conducted as a separate project because the outcome is unknown.

133. A. Information included within the project charter is high level versus detailed. While
     the charter may include a list of high-level risks, it is unlikely that a detailed list can be
     compiled at this early stage of the project.

134. B. There are four development life cycles: predictive, iterative, incremental, and hybrid.
     The iterative development life cycle defines project deliverables early in the development
     life cycle and progressively elaborates them as the project or life cycle progresses.
                                                   Chapter 1: Initiating (Domain 1.0)            245



135. A. The project manager has performed the Define Activities, Sequence Activities, and
     Estimate Activity Resources processes. Next, she is likely to perform the Estimate Activity
     Durations process to determine how long each activity will take.

136. A. Yasmin is using a Waterfall approach, which involves a greater level of up-front
     planning during the early stages of the project life cycle. In this approach, changes to
     requirements tend to follow a change control process.

137. A. The PMI Talent Triangle(R) consists of the following three categories of skill set:
     technical project management, leadership, and strategic and business management. With
     the project being over budget and behind schedule, Nancy is most likely lacking in formal
     project management training and knowledge.

138. A. Robert is correct in stating that project managers should consider all project
     management processes as they are managing projects. This does not mean that all project
     management processes must be carried out, but they must be evaluated and considered for
     their applicability.

139. D. The weighted score of Project C is 23. To calculate the score for each project, multiply
     the score of each criterion against the weight of the criteria and then add up all of the
     scores. See the following table for the calculation of Project C:

      Criterion          Weight Project A Project A Project B Project B Project C Project C
                                score     totals    score     totals    score     totals
      Profit potential 5          5          25          2          10         1          5
      Marketability      1        1          1           5          5          3          3
      Ease of use        3        2          6           3          9          5          15
      Weighted score --           --         32          --         24         --         23

140. C. Payback period is the length of time it takes the company to recoup the initial costs
     of producing the product, service, or result of the project. It is considered to be the least
     precise of all cash flow calculations.

141. B. Projects exist to create a unique product, service, or result. What the director in the
     scenario describes is shifting the back end of an existing app to technology that also
     already exists within the company. This would reflect operations, which are considered to
     be ongoing and repetitive.

142. C. Identify Stakeholders is a process that belongs to the Project Stakeholder Management
     Knowledge Area. The Project Integration Management Knowledge Area has a total
     of seven processes, which are as follows: Develop Project Charter, Develop Project
     Management Plan, Direct and Manage Project Work, Manage Project Knowledge,
     Monitor and Control Project Work, Perform Integrated Change Control, and Close
     Project or Phase.
246        Answers Appendix



143. D. In a functional organization, the role of project manager typically does not exist.
     Instead, it may be a part-time role or a similar role such as a project coordinator.

144. B. A program is defined as related projects, subsidiary programs, and program activities
     managed in a coordinated manner to obtain benefits not available when managing them
     individually. The other options provide the definition of a project, progressive elaboration,
     and product life cycle.

145. A. The chances for successful completion during the Executing phase are medium to high.
     Since the project is nearing the end of execution and the project is currently on track, the
     likelihood of success is high.

146. D. While the project sponsor is typically accountable for the project, it is the project
     manager who assumes responsibility for the overall success of the project.

147. D. According to the PMBOK(R) Guide, most projects fit one of seven needs and demands
     that result in their creation: market demand, organizational need, customer request,
     technological advance, legal requirement, ecological impacts, or social need.

148. C. Initiating, Planning, Executing, Monitoring and Controlling, and Closing make up the
     five project management process groups.

149. D. Since payback period is the least precise cash flow analysis technique, IRR values have
     a higher priority in determining go or no-go project decisions.

150. D. The Project Management Institute (PMI) is the industry-recognized standard for
     project management practices. PMI is active and recognized around the globe, although
     it is headquartered within the United States.

151. D. This project came about as a result of social need. Social need is one of seven typical
     reasons that trigger the need for a project, as noted by the PMBOK(R) Guide.

152. B. According to the PMBOK(R) Guide, assumptions are factors in the planning process
     considered to be true, real, or certain, without proof or demonstration. They are factors
     expected to be in place or to be in evidence.

153. B. Based on the little information provided in the scenario, you can conclude that
     Antwon is the project sponsor through his title. A project sponsor is typically an executive
     in the organization with authority to assign resources and enforce decisions regarding the
     project. As a marketing associate, Lewis is least likely to be the sponsor, although it is
     possible that he may play an important role within the project.

154. D. The question describes technical project management skills, which is one of three
     categories of skill set that make up the PMI Talent Triangle(R). The PMBOK(R) Guide defines
     technical project management skills as the knowledge, skills, and behaviors related to
     specific domains of project, program, and portfolio management.
                                                    Chapter 2: Planning (Domain 2.0)               247



155. D. The assumption log contains both assumptions and constraints and is first created
     during the Develop Project Charter process.

156. B. The portfolio manager will recommend Project B, since it has the highest internal rate
     of return (IRR). IRR is the discount rate when the present value of the cash inflows equals
     the original investment.

157. A. During the early stages of a project, risk probability of occurrence is at its highest;
     uncertainty is greatest during the Initiating phase of the project.

158. C. Project management processes are often revisited several times as the project is refined
     throughout its life, and are therefore performed in an iterative fashion throughout the
     project's life cycle.

159. C. Since the project manager and sponsor are meeting for the first time to discuss the
     overall project, you know that it is likely early on in the project's life cycle. Also, they are
     discussing the project as a whole, meaning that it is for a broad purpose versus a more
     detailed one like some of the other options presented. The most likely answer is that they
     are putting together the project charter.

160. B. The project manager is responsible for understanding the interests of stakeholders
     and getting in front of any potential conflict that may arise as a result of their personal
     interests.



Chapter 2: Planning (Domain 2.0)
  1. A. Meetings are one of the four sets of tools and techniques of the Develop Project
     Management Plan process. The other tools and techniques include the following: expert
     judgment, data gathering (brainstorming, checklists, focus groups, interviews), and
     interpersonal and team skills (conflict management, facilitation, meeting management).
     The other options listed are inputs to the process.

  2. D. According to the PMBOK(R) Guide, decomposition of the total project work into work
     packages involves the following five steps: 1) identifying and analyzing the deliverables,
     2) structuring and organizing the WBS, 3) decomposing the WBS into lower-level
     components, 4) developing and assigning the identification codes, and 5) verifying the
     degree of decomposition of the deliverables.

  3. B. Organizational process assets include historical documents from past projects, along
     with templates. Templates, in particular, can help expedite the preparation of network
     diagrams.

  4. B. There are three network paths: A-B-E, A-C-E, and A-D-E. Figure 2.1 shows the
     network diagram for the information displayed within the table of the question. The
     duration value is not needed to calculate the answer.
248                Answers Appendix



F i g u r e 2 .1         Network diagram: network path calculation

                                        Activity Name:
                                                         B
                                        Duration: 2



  Activity Name:                        Activity Name:                Activity Name:

                     A                                   C                             E
  Duration: 5                           Duration: 10
                                                                      Duration: 2


                                        Activity Name:
                                                         D
                                        Duration: 7




  5. B. To calculate the critical path (which is the longest path through the network diagram),
     add the duration of activities that fall within each network path. The path with the
     greatest duration is the critical path. Figure 2.2 shows the network diagram, based on the
     information provided within the table. The duration of each network path is as follows:
        A-B-E: 9
        A-C-E: 17
        A-D-E: 14

Figure 2.2               Network diagram: critical path calculation

                                        Activity Name:
                                                         B
                                        Duration: 2



  Activity Name:                        Activity Name:                Activity Name:

                     A                                   C                             E
  Duration: 5                           Duration: 10
                                                                      Duration: 2


                                        Activity Name:
                                                         D
                                        Duration: 7




  6. C. To calculate the near critical path (which is the second longest path through the
     network diagram), add the duration of activities that fall within each network path. The
     path with the second greatest duration is the near critical path. Figure 2.3 shows the
     network diagram, based on the information provided within the table. The duration of
     each network path is as follows:
        A-B-E: 9
        A-C-E: 17
        A-D-E: 14
                                                           Chapter 2: Planning (Domain 2.0)       249



Figure 2.3            Network diagram: near critical path calculation.

                                      Activity Name:
                                                       B
                                      Duration: 2



 Activity Name:                       Activity Name:                        Activity Name:

                  A                                    C                                     E
 Duration: 5                          Duration: 10
                                                                            Duration: 2


                                      Activity Name:
                                                       D
                                      Duration: 7




 7. B. ADM only uses the finish-to-start dependency. Precedence diagramming method
    (PDM), on the other hand, uses all dependency types.

 8. A. The project scope statement contains a list of the project deliverables, their
    requirements, and the measurable criteria used to determine project completion. The
    project scope statement is an output of the Define Scope process and is used as an input to
    the Create WBS process.

 9. D. Purchasing insurance is an example of the transfer risk response. This involves shifting
    ownership of a threat to a third party to manage the risk and to own the impact if the
    threat occurs.

10. D. Develop Project Management Plan is the first process in the Planning process group,
    but it belongs to the Project Integration Management Knowledge Area.

11. B. The beta distribution formula using the three-point estimating technique is (Optimistic +
    (4 x Most Likely) + Pessimistic) / 6. Plugging in the values provided yields the following:
    ($2,500 + (4 x $3,500) + $7,200 / 6 = $3,950.

12. C. The project scope statement includes the product scope description, deliverables,
    acceptance criteria, and project exclusions. The project requirements are considered to be
    part of the requirements documentation.

13. D. The WBS is a decomposition of the total scope of work to be carried out by the project
    team. As is implied, it represents 100 percent of the project's scope, as well as objectives to
    be accomplished to produce the required deliverables.

14. C. Total float refers to the amount of time you can delay the earliest start of an activity
    without delaying the ending of the project. To calculate total float, subtract either the
    early start from the late start or the early finish from the late finish (both give you the
    same answer).

15. A. The tools and techniques of the Plan Risk Management process are expert judgment,
    data analysis, and meetings.
250        Answers Appendix



 16. A. The inputs of the Define Scope process include project management plan, project
     charter, project documents, enterprise environmental factors, and organizational
     process assets. Organizational process assets include historical information and product
     descriptions (which describes option D). Project management information system is not
     part of this process.

 17. A. There are two types of risk acceptance in which no proactive risk response strategy is
     selected: passive and active acceptance. Passive acceptance means that no action will be
     taken other than to periodically monitor the risk.

 18. A. Requirements are the specifications of the deliverables and tell you how you know the
     deliverable was completed successfully.

 19. A. Market research can be used to examine industry and seller capabilities. Information
     can be obtained in places such as conferences, online reviews, and other sources available
     in the market.

 20. C. Defining the requirements and obtaining sign-off on the requirements will help
     you to ensure customer satisfaction. When stakeholders are aware of and agree to the
     requirements, they know exactly what the project is expected to deliver as well as what is
     not part of the deliverables.

 21. C. Roles and responsibilities, training needs, and recognition and rewards are all elements
     documented in the resource management plan. Other elements covered in the plan are
     the list of methods for identifying resources, acquiring resources, project organizational
     charts, project team resource management, team development, and resource control.

 22. B. The changes to the project management plan (and subsidiary plans within it) are
     dispositioned and managed through the Perform Integrated Change Control process.

 23. B. Alyssa is carrying out the Plan Scope Management process and is using the expert
     judgment technique to help produce the scope management plan.

 24. C. Alyssa is performing the Develop Project Management Plan process. The only output
     of this process is the project management plan.

 25. C. Precedence diagramming method (PDM) is the most frequently used diagramming
     method. PDM uses boxes to represent activities and connects the activities with arrows-
     showing the dependencies between them. PDM is also known as activity on node (AON).

 26. A. The triangular distribution formula using the three-point estimating technique is
     (Optimistic + Most Likely + Pessimistic) / 3. Plugging in the values provided yields the
     following: ($2,500 + $3,500 + $7,200) / 3 = $4,400.

 27. A. Carina will update risks identified and information about the risks within the risk
     register. While project documents is technically a correct answer (since the risk register
     is a project document), risk register is more specific and therefore a better choice. Her
     findings may also find their way into the risk report, although, again, that is a secondary
     choice.
                                                Chapter 2: Planning (Domain 2.0)                251



28. D. The initial project organization is a component of the Plan Resource Management
    process.

29. C. The project objectives should include quantifiable criteria that can be used to help
    measure project success. Project objectives should include schedule, cost, and quality
    measurements.

30. D. Analogous estimating is also referred to as top-down estimating. This technique uses
    the actual duration of a similar activity completed on a previous project to determine the
    duration of a current activity.

31. D. Facilitated workshops are not a tool and technique of this process. Expert judgment,
    data analysis, and meetings are the tools and techniques of the Plan Scope Management
    process.

32. A. Alyssa is carrying out the Plan Scope Management process. The purpose of this
    process is to create a scope management plan that documents how the project and product
    scope will be defined, validated, and controlled.

33. C. The project manager is putting together the cost management plan, which is an
    activity carried out through the Plan Cost Management process. The cost management
    plan documents the rules of performance measurement, level of precision and accuracy,
    units of measure, organizational procedures links, control thresholds, reporting formats,
    process descriptions, and other budget-related details necessary to develop, manage, and
    control the budget.

34. B. The five steps of decomposition are to identify major deliverables, organize the WBS,
    decompose the WBS components into lower-level components, assign identification codes,
    and validate the WBS. No mention was made in the question of assigning identification
    codes or validating the correctness of decomposition, so A is not correct. The first three
    steps of the decomposition process for the Design deliverable have been performed.

35. B. Plan Risk Responses belongs to the Planning process group, while Implement Risk
    Responses belongs in Executing.

36. B. Appraisal costs are associated with the cost of quality and are the costs expended
    to examine the product or process and make certain the requirements are being met.
    Inspection and testing are examples of appraisal costs.

37. A. The project scope statement contains the project scope description, project
    deliverables, acceptance criteria, and project exclusions.

38. C. According to the PMBOK(R) Guide, the purpose of the Plan Communications
    Management process is to develop an appropriate approach and plan for project
    communications activities based on the information needs of each stakeholder or group,
    the available organizational assets, and the needs of the project.

39. B. Lateral thinking is a form of alternatives analysis which is part of the data analysis
    tool and technique of the Define Scope process.
252         Answers Appendix



 40.    B. Marysil will need to add a lag between the activities. A lag occurs when time must
       elapse between two activities, where the delay is added to the successor activity. A lead, on
       the other hand, speeds up the successor activity.

 41. C. The purpose of the Perform Qualitative Risk Analysis process is to prioritize
     individual project risks for further analysis or action by assessing their probability of
     occurrence and impact as well as other characteristics.

 42. B. Alyssa is performing the Develop Project Management Plan process. The purpose of
     this process is to define, prepare, and coordinate all plan components and consolidate
     them into an integrated project management plan.

 43. A. This Knowledge Area is responsible for both human and physical resources.

 44. B. The best answer is the communications management plan, which is a subsidiary of
     the project management plan. While project management plan is also a correct answer,
     the communications management plan is a more specific choice and therefore a better
     answer. Stakeholder communication requirements, escalation processes, and methods for
     receiving/obtaining information are all elements addressed within the communications
     management plan.

 45. C. The product scope defines the features and characteristics that describe the product,
     service, or result of the project.

 46. A. Activity attributes describe the characteristics of the activities and are considered an
     extension of the activity list. They change over the life of the project as more information
     is known.

 47. A. The product scope description is a component of the project charter and of the project
     scope statement, but it is not an input to this process.

 48. D. Deliverables are measurable outcomes, measurable results, or specific items that must
     be produced before the project or project phase is considered complete. Requirements
     are the specifications of the deliverables and tell you how you know the deliverables were
     completed successfully.

 49. C. This statement does describe some objectives but not adequately. Objectives are
     quantifiable criteria used to measure project success and should include schedule, cost,
     and quality metrics. There are no measures of time, cost, or quality mentioned in this
     statement. Requirements describe the specifications of the objectives and typically
     wouldn't be mixed into an objective statement. The objective should be clear and concise.

 50. D. Interpersonal and team skills are part of the tools and techniques of the Develop
     Project Management Plan process. All other options listed are correct inputs.

 51. C. An organization breakdown structure is a form of organization chart that shows
     the departments, work units, or teams within an organization and their respective work
     packages.

 52. B. Bottom-up estimating is carried out by obtaining individual estimates for each project
     activity and then adding all of them up together to come up with a total estimate for the
                                                   Chapter 2: Planning (Domain 2.0)                253



      work package or the project. It is generally an accurate means of estimating, although it's
      more time-consuming and costly to perform.

53. B. Risk strategy, methodology, and risk-related roles and responsibilities are all elements
    of the risk management plan. Other areas covered by the plan include the following:
    risk-related funding, timing, risk categories, stakeholder risk appetite, definitions of risk
    probability and impacts, probability and impact matrix, reporting formats, and tracking.

54. A. Resource calendars are an input to the Estimate Activity Resources process through
    the project documents input, not a tool and technique.

55. C. Analogous estimating is less time-consuming than other estimating techniques and can
    be used to estimate time for different phases on the project. Analogous estimating is not
    as accurate as other estimating techniques.

56. B. While all of the documents listed are useful inputs to the process, the risk register is
    essential, as it contains the list of identified risks that they will analyze.

57. C. The project manager is carrying out activities associated with the Sequence Activities
    process. The purpose of this process is to identify and document relationships among the
    project activities.

58. D. The formula for calculating lines of communication is as follows, where n represents
    the total number of stakeholders (you are already assumed to have been included in the
    number):
      n (n - 1)/2
      Plug in the numbers to get the following: $35(35 - 1)/2 = $595.

59. A. Completion of the product scope is measured against the product requirements,
    whereas completion of the project scope is measured against the project management
    plan. Although requirements documentation is technically a correct answer, product
    requirements is a far more specific answer.

60.    B. According to the PMBOK(R) Guide, a definitive range of estimates is -5 percent to
      +10 percent.

61. B. Late finish is calculated by subtracting the duration of the last activity (activity 4) from
    its start date. Since it is one day, that means the late finish is 6/4. Late start is 7 days prior
    to 6/4, which is 5/29.

62. C. As part of carrying out the Perform Quantitative Risk Analysis process, updates are
    made to the risk register. Among the updates are an assessment of overall project risk
    exposure and detailed probabilistic analysis of the project.

63. C. To calculate the early start and early finish for activity 4, you need to perform a
    forward pass. This is done by adding the duration of activity 4 to the early finish date of
    activity 3.

64. B. To determine the total duration of the project, you add up the expected value for each
    activity. Note, you calculate expected value only for activities that have zero float.
254        Answers Appendix



 65. B. Resource leveling is used when resources are overallocated, available only at certain
     times, or assigned to more than one activity at a time. This is part of resource
     optimization techniques and a tool and technique of the Develop Schedule process.

 66. A. First you need to calculate the standard deviation for this activity, which is 1.67.
     That is, (Pessimistic - Optimistic) / 6. A 95.44 percent confidence factor is 3 standard
     deviations. That is, 1.67 x 3 = 5.01. The expected value is 23 days, so you have a
     95.44 percent chance of completing the activity within between 18 and 28 days.

 67. B. Resource calendars are an input, not an output, of the Develop Schedule process as one
     of the project documents utilized.

 68. A. The formula for calculating lines of communication is as follows, where n represents
     the total number of stakeholders (you are already assumed to have been included in the
     number):
      n (n - 1) / 2
      Plug in the numbers to get the following: $12(12 - 1) / 2 = $66.

 69. B. Carina is performing the Identify Risks process. The purpose of the process is to
     identify individual project risks, as well as sources of overall project risk, and document
     their characteristics.

 70. C. Discretionary dependencies can create arbitrary total float values.

 71. A. Philip Crosby is the quality theorist behind the Zero Defects practice, which promotes
     doing it right the first time.

 72. B. The project team is using the product analysis technique to define the scope of the
     process (part of the Define Scope process).

 73. B. The team is engaged in the Estimate Costs process. The purpose of this process is to
     develop an approximation of the cost of resources needed to complete project work.

 74. D. Carrie used the analogous estimating technique, which is a form of expert judgment. It
     is a tool and technique of the Estimate Activity Durations process. Analogous estimating
     bases estimates on previous activities that are similar in fact, and they require the person
     estimating them to have expertise in the activity. Analogous estimating techniques are
     typically used to estimate project duration when there is a limited amount of information
     about the project.

 75. A. Low-priority risks are added to a watch list within the risk register, where they will be
     monitored for possible changes.

 76. D. Expected value can be calculated using a triangular distribution (simple average)
     or beta distribution (weighted average). The three-point estimating formula that uses a
     triangular distribution is as follows: (Optimistic + Pessimistic + Most Likely) / 3. Plug in
     the values provided to calculate the following: ($25 + $50 + $35) / 3 = $36.7, or 37 when
     rounded to the nearest whole number.
                                                 Chapter 2: Planning (Domain 2.0)               255



77. B. There are two possible answers listed: schedule and project management plan.
    The schedule management plan documents the schedule model, accuracy levels, units
    of measure, control thresholds, and performance measurement rules. Because the
    schedule management plan is a component of the project management plan, the project
    management plan was another good answer, although not as specific as schedule
    management plan.

78. A. Trudy and Roy are using the stakeholder engagement assessment matrix tool, which
    is part of the data representation tool and technique of the Plan Stakeholder Engagement
    process. This matrix classifies stakeholders in five ways: unaware, resistant, neutral,
    supportive, or leading.

79. B. The project manager has carried out the Develop Project Charter and Identify
    Stakeholders processes. He will likely begin to assemble the project management plan as a
    next step, by performing activities outlined within the Develop Project Management Plan
    process.

80. B. Email is a form of push communication, which is one-way and refers to sending
    information to the intended receivers.

81. C. The team is using bottom-up estimating. This technique estimates costs associated
    with every activity individually and then rolls them up to derive either a more accurate
    activity-level estimate or a total project estimate.

82. D. Functional requirements describe the behaviors of the product, including actions,
    processes, data, and interactions that the product should execute.

83. B. Schedule network analysis is a tool and technique of the Develop Schedule process
    that's used in conjunction with other tools and techniques, including the critical path
    method, to produce the project schedule.

84. C. Three-point estimates are an average of the three estimates (most likely, optimistic,
    and pessimistic), not a weighted average. The PERT calculation is a weighted average
    technique.

85. C. Schedule compression shortens the project schedule without changing the project
    scope. Crashing doesn't always give you a good alternative and typically increases project
    costs. Fast-tracking typically increases risk and necessitates rework.

86. A. Expected value is calculated as follows: (Optimistic + Pessimistic + (4 x Most Likely)) / 6.
    The formula is as follows: ($75 + $250 + (4 x $100)) / 6 = $120.83.

87. A. Kaylee and Alyssa are using the Monte Carlo analysis, which simulates the combined
    effects of individual project risks and other sources of uncertainty to determine their
    potential impact on the project objectives.

88. B. Expected value can be calculated using a triangular distribution (simple average)
    or beta distribution (weighted average). The three-point estimating formula that uses a
    beta distribution is: (Optimistic + Pessimistic + (4 x Most Likely)) / 6. Plug in the values
    provided to calculate the following: ($25 + $50 + ($35 x 4)) / 6 = $35.8, or 36 when
    rounded to the nearest whole number.
256        Answers Appendix



 89. B. Trudy and Roy are carrying out activities associated with the Plan Stakeholder
     Engagement process. The activity will yield the stakeholder engagement plan.

 90. C. The schedule management plan documents the method and approach for developing,
     managing, and controlling the project schedule.

 91. A. A phone conversation where a dialogue exchange occurs is a form of interactive
     communication. This type of communication involves multidirectional communication
     where two or more parties exchange thoughts or ideas.

 92. A. Alternatives analysis is part of the data analysis tool and technique, used in the
     Plan Scope Management process. This helps to consider the various ways of collecting
     requirements, elaborating on the scope, creating the product, and then validating and
     controlling the scope as work is carried out.

 93. B. Communications requirements analysis examines the information needs of the
     project stakeholders and considers the number of channels of communication. The
     communication technology tool and technique looks at methodologies for transferring
     information among stakeholders.

 94. B. The inputs of the Plan Communications Management process that the PMBOK(R)
     Guide notes as particularly important are lessons learned and historical information,
     which are part of the organizational process assets input.

 95. D. Communications requirements analysis, a tool and technique of the Plan
     Communications Management process, considers things such as company and
     departmental organization charts, stakeholder relationships, all the departments and
     disciplines involved in the project, the number of people associated with the project
     and their location, and any external needs like the media, government, or industry
     organizations requiring communication updates.

 96. A. There are 10 channels of communication, which is taken into consideration
     when using the communications requirement analysis tool and technique of the Plan
     Communications Management process. The formula for this is 5(5 - 1) / 2.

 97. B. The greatest expense for most projects is resources, both human and material and
     supplies.

 98. C. Cost baselines and schedule baselines are used to measure performance in the
     Executing and Monitoring and Controlling processes.

 99. B. According to the PMBOK(R) Guide, there are two levels of risk: individual project risk
     and overall project risk. An individual project risk is an uncertain event or condition that,
     if it occurs, has a positive or negative effect on one or more project objectives.

100. C. Parametric estimating is a quantitatively based estimating method that multiplies the
     quantity of work by the rate or uses an algorithm in conjunction with historical data to
     determine cost, budget, or duration estimates. When the information is reliable, it yields
     an estimate that is high in accuracy.
                                                  Chapter 2: Planning (Domain 2.0)              257



101. C. You are performing the Determine Budget process. The purpose of this process is to
     aggregate the estimated costs of individual activities or work packages to establish an
     authorized cost baseline.

102. B. Outputs of the Define Activities process include the activity list, activity attributers,
     milestone list, change requests, and project management plan updates. The question has
     already indicated that the activity list has already been created, and the milestone list is
     the only viable option.

103. B. Kaylee has just carried out the Collect Requirements process and is likely to carry out
     the Define Scope process next.

104. C. The Determine Budget process establishes the cost baseline for the project and is an
     output of this process.

105. D. Warranty period costs are part of the Estimate Costs process, not Determine Budget.

106. D. According to the PMBOK(R) Guide, the purpose of the Plan Stakeholder Engagement
     process is to develop approaches to involve project stakeholders based on their needs,
     expectations, interests, and potential impacts on the project. This is the second process of
     the Project Stakeholder Management Knowledge Area.

107. D. Level of accuracy describes your rounding precision, and units of measure describes
     how you will measure resources, for example, days, weeks, months.

108. B. While the project management plan--the output of the Develop Project Management
     Plan process--may outline the approach to collecting the requirements, it does not contain
     the list of requirements themselves. Requirements are listed within the requirements
     documentation. All other statements are true.

109. B. The WBS serves as the basis for estimating costs. It is an input to the Estimate Costs
     process through the scope baseline, which is part of the project management plan. It
     contains all the project deliverables and the control accounts associated with work
     package elements.

110. B. Three-point estimating is the technique to use when you want to improve your
     estimates and account for risk and estimation uncertainty.

111. D. Walter Shewhart is considered to be the grandfather of TQM; he developed statistical
     tools to examine when a corrective action must be applied to a process.

112. C. According to the PMBOK(R) Guide, there are two levels of risk: individual project risk
     and overall project risk. An overall project risk is the effect of uncertainty on the project
     as a whole, arising from all sources of uncertainty.

113. D. You are carrying out the Create WBS process. The purpose of the process is to
     subdivide the project deliverables and project work into smaller, more manageable
     components.
258        Answers Appendix



114. B. The Determine Budget process yields the cost baseline, project funding requirements,
     and updates to project documents. The project funding requirements represent the total
     funding requirements and periodic funding requirements of the project.

115. A. You have documented the basis of estimates, which includes a description of how the
     estimates were derived, the range of possible results, constraints, and assumptions.

116. A. The basis of estimates and project documents updates are both outputs of the Estimate
     Costs process.

117. A. The performance measurement baseline is another term for the cost baseline when
     you're using earned value management techniques to determine costs.

118. B. The funding requirements are derived from the cost baseline. Management reserve is
     released in increments throughout the project, and the funding requirements are an output
     of the Determine Budget process.

119. D. The duration of a milestone is zero, marking a significant point in time--typically the
     start or completion of a major deliverable. Therefore, "Finish GUI" is not a milestone.

120. C. The project budget includes the cost baseline. Option C has it backwards.

121. B. Plan Stakeholder Engagement is concerned with effectively engaging stakeholders,
     understanding their needs and interests, understanding the good and bad things they
     bring to the project, and understanding how the project will impact them.

122. D. You should develop a mitigation plan for installation and setup to reduce the
     probability and/or impact of this risk to the project. Option A is not correct because the
     sharing response strategy is a strategy for positive risks. This is a negative risk to the
     project.

123. B. The activities list is a key element of the project schedule that will form the schedule
     baseline. According to the PMBOK(R) Guide, the scope baseline consists of the following:
     the project scope statement, WBS, work packages, planning packages, and WBS
     dictionary.

124. A. Since you've identified the risks, you've completed the Identify Risks process.

125. B. The risk probability and impact assessment tool and technique is used to determine
     the likelihood the risk will occur and the potential effects on project objectives. After
     performing the assessment, you'll determine risk scores or conditions (red, yellow, green)
     using the probability and impact matrix.

126. D. The probability and impact matrix is not an input to the Perform Quantitative Risk
     Analysis process. It is used to prioritize risks, it's defined in the risk management plan,
     and it's used as a tool and technique in the Perform Qualitative Risk Analysis process.

127. C. To calculate the critical path, you must first draw out the network diagram and then add
     the duration of each activity that falls within the individual network paths. Figure 2.4 shows
     the network diagram and the three network paths that exist within it. The following is the
     duration of each of those paths: A-B-D-F = 17, A-C-D-F = 19, A-C-E-F = 21.
                                                                         Chapter 2: Planning (Domain 2.0)                                       259



Figure 2.4                    Network diagram: critical path

                                     Early        Total      Early        Early         Total      Early
                                     Start:       Float:     Finish:      Start:        Float:     Finish:
                                                Activity Name:                        Activity Name:
                                                      B                                     D
 Early        Total      Early       Late         Duration: Late          Late          Duration: Late          Early      Total      Early
 Start:       Float:     Finish:     Start:       2         Finish:       Start:        4         Finish:       Start:     Float:     Finish:
            Activity Name:                                                                                               Activity Name:
                  A                                                                                                            F
 Late         Duration: Late                                                                                    Late       Duration: Late
 Start:       5         Finish:      Early        Total      Early        Early         Total      Early        Start:     6         Finish:
                                     Start:       Float:     Finish:      Start:        Float:     Finish:
                                                Activity Name:                        Activity Name:
                                                      C                                     E
                                     Late         Duration: Late          Late          Duration: Late
                                     Start:       4         Finish:       Start:        6         Finish:




128. C. To calculate the early finish of activity D, you would first need to perform a forward
     pass. To calculate forward pass, draw the network diagram and then follow these steps:
     1. Begin with the first activity. 2. The calculation of the first activity begins with an early
     start date of 1. Add the duration of the activity and then subtract 1 to determine the early
     finish. This is based on the concept of calendar days. 3. The early start date of the next
     activity is the early finish date of the previous activity plus 1. Continue calculating the
     early start and early finish dates forward through all the network paths while following
     the existing dependencies. 4. When an activity has two connecting predecessors, the early
     start date would be the early finish of the predecessor that finishes last, plus 1. Figure 2.5
     shows the network diagram with early start and early finish dates calculated.

Figure 2.5                    Network diagram: forward pass

                                     Early        Total      Early        Early         Total      Early
                                     Start: 6     Float:     Finish: 7    Start: 10     Float:     Finish: 13
                                                Activity Name:                        Activity Name:
                                                      B                                     D
 Early        Total      Early       Late         Duration: Late          Late          Duration: Late          Early     Total       Early
 Start: 1     Float:     Finish: 5   Start:       2         Finish:       Start:        4         Finish:       Start: 16 Float:      Finish: 21
            Activity Name:                                                                                               Activity Name:
                  A                                                                                                            F
 Late         Duration: Late                                                                                    Late       Duration: Late
 Start:       5         Finish:      Early        Total      Early        Early         Total      Early        Start:     6         Finish:
                                     Start: 6     Float:     Finish: 9    Start: 10     Float:     Finish: 15
                                                Activity Name:                        Activity Name:
                                                      C                                     E
                                     Late         Duration: Late          Late          Duration: Late
                                     Start:       4         Finish:       Start:        6         Finish:
260                Answers Appendix



129. A. To calculate the late start of activity C, you would first need to perform a forward
     pass and a backward pass. To calculate backward pass, draw the network diagram and
     perform a forward pass and then follow these steps: 1. Begin with the last activity. The
     late finish will be the same as the early finish date. 2. Subtract the duration of the activity
     from the end date and add 1 to calculate late start. Take this number and subtract 1
     to calculate the late finish of its predecessors. 3. Continue calculating the latest start
     and latest finish dates, moving backward through all of the network paths. 4. When an
     activity has two connecting predecessors, the late finish date would be the late start minus
     1 of the activity that follows. Figure 2.6 shows the network diagram with early start and
     early finish dates calculated.

Figure 2.6                    Network diagram: backward pass

                                     Early        Total      Early       Early         Total      Early
                                     Start: 6     Float:     Finish: 7   Start: 10     Float:     Finish: 13
                                                Activity Name:                       Activity Name:
                                                      B                                    D
 Early        Total      Early       Late         Duration: Late         Late          Duration: Late          Early     Total      Early
 Start: 1     Float:     Finish: 5   Start: 8     2         Finish: 9    Start: 12     4         Finish: 15    Start: 16 Float:     Finish: 21
            Activity Name:                                                                                             Activity Name:
                  A                                                                                                          F
 Late         Duration: Late                                                                                   Late      Duration: Late
 Start: 1     5         Finish: 5    Early        Total      Early       Early         Total      Early        Start: 16 6         Finish: 21
                                     Start: 6     Float:     Finish: 9   Start: 10     Float:     Finish: 15
                                                Activity Name:                       Activity Name:
                                                      C                                    E
                                     Late         Duration: Late         Late          Duration: Late
                                     Start: 6     4         Finish: 9    Start: 10     6         Finish: 15




130. A. Total float refers to the amount of time you can delay the earliest start of an activity
     without delaying the ending of the project. To calculate total float, you would first need to
     draw the network diagram and then perform a forward pass and a backward pass. Next,
     subtract either the early start from the late start or the early finish from the late finish
     (both should give you the same answer). Figure 2.7 shows the network diagram with total
     float calculated.

F i g u r e 2 .7              Network diagram: float

                                     Early        Total      Early       Early         Total      Early
                                     Start: 6     Float: 2   Finish: 7   Start: 10     Float: 2   Finish: 13
                                                Activity Name:                       Activity Name:
                                                      B                                    D
 Early        Total      Early       Late         Duration: Late         Late          Duration: Late          Early     Total      Early
 Start: 1     Float: 0   Finish: 5   Start: 8     2         Finish: 9    Start: 12     4         Finish: 15    Start: 16 Float: 0   Finish: 21
            Activity Name:                                                                                             Activity Name:
                  A                                                                                                          F
 Late         Duration: Late                                                                                   Late      Duration: Late
 Start: 1     5         Finish: 5    Early        Total      Early       Early         Total      Early        Start: 16 6         Finish: 21
                                     Start: 6     Float: 0   Finish: 9   Start: 10     Float: 0   Finish: 15
                                                Activity Name:                       Activity Name:
                                                      C                                    E
                                     Late         Duration: Late         Late          Duration: Late
                                     Start: 6     4         Finish: 9    Start: 10     6         Finish: 15
                                                  Chapter 2: Planning (Domain 2.0)                  261



131. A. Cost-reimbursable contracts go by various names, depending on certain terms used.
     They include: cost plus incentive fee, cost plus award fee, cost plus percentage of cost, and
     cost plus fixed fee.

132. C. The Identify Risks process has data-gathering techniques that include brainstorming,
     checklists, and interviewing.

133. A. The Estimate Costs process, not the Determine Budget process, utilizes several
     estimating techniques.

134. D. Assessing risk probability is difficult because it relies on expert judgment; the other
     options listed are not used during this process.

135. B. Mandatory dependencies are also known as hard logic or hard dependencies. In a
     mandatory dependency, the nature of the work itself dictates the order in which activities
     should be performed.

136. B. You are in the process of carrying out the Collect Requirements process, which is part
     of the Planning process group.

137. B. The lowest level of the WBS is the work package. Work packages are later decomposed
     further into activities as part of developing the schedule. Activities, however, are not
     considered to be part of the WBS.

138. C. A fixed-price contract can either set a specific, firm price for the goods or services
     rendered or include incentives for meeting or exceeding certain contract deliverables.
     There are three types of fixed-price contracts: firm fixed-price, fixed-price incentive fee,
     and fixed-price with economic price adjustment.

139. C. Tracking includes a description of how you'll document the history of the risk
     activities for the current project and how the risk processes will be audited. This section
     of the risk management plan is also helpful for lessons learned.

140. D. Make-or-buy analysis is a tool and technique of the Plan Procurement Management
     process.

141. C. Monte Carlo analysis examines risk from the perspective of the project as a whole.

142. C. The procurement SOW can be prepared by either the buyer or the seller, but it is
     progressively elaborated throughout the procurement processes and will likely change
     prior to contract award.

143. B. The analogous estimating technique is a form of expert judgment, which uses the
     actual duration of a similar activity completed on a previous project to determine the
     duration of the current activity. This means that Alyssa would rely on feedback from the
     subject-matter expert who noted that in a past similar project it took 13 hours to complete
     a similar activity.

144. D. Data analysis is a tool and technique of the Estimate Costs process. There are several
     techniques that are part of data analysis, such as alternatives analysis. Other techniques
     include reserve analysis and cost of quality.
262        Answers Appendix



145. A. A fallback plan, also referred to as a contingency plan, is a risk response strategy that
     is used when the initial response is not fully effective.

146. C. The organizational breakdown structure, bill of materials, risk breakdown structure,
     and resource breakdown structure all present project information in a hierarchical
     fashion. The resource assignment matrix does not.

147. A. Fixed-price incentive fee contracts are the best option when you need a well-defined set
     of deliverables for a set price and are including a bonus or incentive for early completion
     or exceeding expectations.

148. D. According to the PMBOK(R) Guide, the requirements traceability matrix is a grid that
     links product requirements from their origin to the deliverables that satisfy them.

149. B. The cost plus fixed fee contract reimburses the seller for his or her allowable costs and
     includes a fixed fee for completing the project as outlined in the terms of the contract.

150. D. The RAM and RACI charts, which are included as a component of Organization
     Charts and Position Descriptions tool and technique, are a matrix-based chart.

151. C. When using price alone as a criterion for selection, there should be more than one
     vendor who can supply the goods or services you are procuring. However, that doesn't
     mean you can't use additional criteria for source selection. You should include costs such
     as delivery and setup in the purchase price criterion.

152. C. Fixed-price with economic price adjustment contracts are used for projects that are
     expected to span several years and allows for adjustments because of inflation, cost
     increases, and so on.

153. A. RACI charts are part of the organization charts and position descriptions tool and
     technique of the Plan Resource Management process. They are matrix-based charts, but
     matrix-based charts are part of the organization charts and position descriptions tool and
     technique.

154. A. The project team is participating in bottom-up estimating, which will produce
     activity cost estimates. This activity is associated with the Estimate Costs process. Basis
     of estimates may also be generated through this session; cost estimates, however, are the
     primary end outcome of the activity.

155. B. There are two types of risk acceptance where no proactive risk response strategy
     is selected: passive and active acceptance. Active acceptance means that a contingency
     reserve will be set aside (whether time, money, or resources) to be used to address the
     consequences of the risk, if needed.

156. B. The Plan Procurement Management process can influence the project schedule (and
     vice versa). The Estimate Activity Resources process, make-or-buy decisions, and the
     organization's business cycle may have an impact on the Plan Procurement Management
     process.

157. A. This describes the cost-benefit analysis tool and technique of the Plan Quality
     Management process.
                                               Chapter 3: Executing (Domain 3.0)               263



158. A. According to the PMBOK(R) Guide, the project management plan describes how the
     project will be executed, monitored, controlled, and closed. It brings together all of the
     subsidiary management plans and baselines, as well as other information, to manage the
     project.

159. D. Parametric estimating is a quantitatively based estimating method that multiplies the
     quantity of work by the rate or uses an algorithm in conjunction with historical data to
     determine cost, budget, or duration estimates. Based on this definition, take 1,320 and
     divide by 110 to get 12.

160. C. The processes belonging to the Project Scope Management Knowledge Area include
     the following: Plan Scope Management, Collect Requirements, Define Scope, Create
     WBS, Validate Scope, and Control Scope.



Chapter 3: Executing (Domain 3.0)
  1. B. The project manager is currently performing the Direct and Manage Project Work
     process. Of the options provided, project management information system (PMIS) is the
     only tool or technique listed. The change log and approved change requests are inputs to
     the process, while work performance data is an output.

  2. B. The tools and techniques of the Develop Team process are colocation, virtual
     teams, communication technology, interpersonal and team skills (conflict management,
     influencing, motivation, negotiation, team building), recognition and rewards, training,
     individual and team assessments, and meetings. Emotional intelligence is a tool and
     technique of the Manage Teams process.

  3. C. This question describes the Manage Communications and Manage Stakeholder
     Engagement processes, respectively. There is no process called Information Distribution.

  4.    A. Recognition and rewards are a tool and technique of the Develop Team process.
       Rewards should be in proportion to the achievement and linked to the performance. If
       you reward the same team members over and over again, it could be a morale killer for
       other team members.

  5. B. The solicitation stage is where vendors respond to the RFP.

  6. B. Information management systems are ways of distributing project information to the
     team. Electronic files are a method to store files and are not a distribution method.

  7. C. Expert power occurs when someone has a considerable amount of knowledge about a
     subject or has special abilities.

  8. D. All the options are part of the organizational process assets updates output of this
     process. Feedback from stakeholders can be used on the current project as well as future
     projects.
264         Answers Appendix



  9. A. The organizational process assets output in this process consist of the following:
     stakeholder notifications, project reports, project presentations, project records, lessons
     learned documentation, and feedback from stakeholders.

 10. A. The project manager and team are likely to execute the work associated with the
     approved change requests. These approved change requests are implemented through the
     Direct and Manage Project Work process.

 11. B. According to the PMBOK(R) Guide, work performance data refers to the raw
     observations and measurements identified during activities being performed to carry out
     the project work. This occurs as a result of processes belonging to the Executing process
     group.

 12. D. The Manage Communications process is concerned with ensuring timely and
     appropriate collection, creation, distribution, storage, retrieval, management, monitoring,
     and the ultimate disposition of project information.

 13. B. The best response is transformational and legitimate. This leader is focusing on
     collaborating and influencing. She listens to your responses and then offers suggestions
     of her own. The situational style of leadership could have been a correct response to this
     question, but it wasn't an option. Her power of leadership is legitimate because of the
     position she holds.

 14. B. This is describing a weighting system technique. Vendor B had a final score of 37, and
     vendor A had a final score of 26. For each vendor, multiply each score by its weight, and
     add the results to obtain that vendor's final score.

 15. D. You must consider the characteristics of potential project team members, whether
     they're from inside or outside the organization. This question describes the enterprise
     environmental factors that should be considered as an input to Acquire Resources.

 16.    A. The Achievement Theory is attributed to David McClelland and says people are
       motivated by the need for power, achievement, and affiliation. Vroom introduced the
       Expectancy Theory, Herzberg introduced the Hygiene Theory, and McGregor is known
       for Theory X and Theory Y.

 17. C. Proposal evaluation techniques are a tool and technique of this process. It is also an
     example of source selection criteria, which are an input to this process and may also
     include financial capacity and technical capability.

 18. A. You are in the Executing processes, so therefore you are in the Manage Stakeholder
     Engagement process. This question describes interpersonal and team skills tool and
     technique for this process.

 19. C. The project manager is performing the Manage Stakeholder Engagement process. This
     process includes activities such as engaging stakeholders at appropriate stages, managing
     their expectations through negotiation and communication, addressing risks or potential
     concerns related to their management and anticipating future issues, and clarifying and
     resolving issues identified.
                                                Chapter 3: Executing (Domain 3.0)               265



20. B. Teams are made up of individuals, and individual development is a factor critical to
    project success.

21. C. The Manage Project Knowledge process, like most processes, is performed iteratively
    throughout the project's life cycle.

22. C. The project manager is performing activities related to the Manage Stakeholder
    Engagement process. Interpersonal and team skills, a tool and technique of this process,
    involves cultural awareness.

23. C. Implementing approved changes occurs as part of the Direct and Manage Project
    Work process, which is part of the Executing process group.

24. A. Colocation is also known as a tight matrix. These terms refer to placing many or all of
    the project team members physically together in the same place.

25. A. Directing, also referred to as forcing, is a conflict resolution technique where one's
    viewpoint is pushed at the expense of others. This is typically a win-lose solution.

26. A. Screening systems use predefined performance criteria or a set of defined minimum
    requirements to screen out unsuitable vendors.

27. A. The purpose of the Develop Team process is to improve competencies, team member
    interaction, and the overall team environment to enhance project performance.

28.    D. Good leaders use referent power, which is inferred to them by their subordinates.
      They are visionaries and are concerned with the big picture, or strategic direction and
      plans. A project manager's primary goal is to satisfy stakeholder needs.

29. D. The negotiated draft contract is required as part of the selected sellers output.

30. B. According to the PMBOK(R) Guide, the issue log is used to promote communication
    with stakeholders. The issue log is part of the project documents updates output of this
    process.

31. C. The Executing process group has a total of 10 project management processes, and
    they are as follows: Direct and Manage Project Work, Acquire Resources, Develop
    Team, Manage Team, Implement Risk Responses, Manage Project Knowledge, Manage
    Quality, Manage Communications, Conduct Procurements, and Manage Stakeholder
    Engagement.

32. B. The lessons learned register, created out of the Manage Project Knowledge process,
    records information about situations that have occurred within the project, including
    recording challenges, problems, realized risks and opportunities, and other information
    relevant for future reference. While "project documents" is a technically accurate answer,
    "lessons learned register" is a more specific answer.

33. B. Nicolas used the stakeholder engagement plan as part of carrying out the Manage
    Stakeholder Engagement process activities. The stakeholder engagement plan is a key
    input to this process, and it documents identified strategies and actions required to
    promote productive involvement of stakeholders.
266        Answers Appendix



 34. B. Expert power occurs when the person being influenced believes the person doing the
     influencing, typically because they are knowledgeable about the subject or have special
     abilities that make them an expert.

 35. D. Quality improvements come about as a result of quality audits, which are a tool and
     technique of the Manage Quality process. Quality improvements are implemented by
     submitting change requests and/or taking corrective action.

 36. A. These team members are confrontational with each other and are trying to find their
     position within the team and their standing with you. This describes the storming stage of
     team development.

 37. A. The Manage Stakeholder Engagement process has three outputs: change requests,
     project management plan updates, and project documents updates. The issue log is a
     project document and is updated as part of the project documents updates output of this
     process.

 38. A. Work performance data involves gathering, documenting, and recording the status of
     project activities, including those noted in this question.

 39. D. This question describes the enterprise environmental factors input of the Acquire
     Resources process and refers to the Responsibility section of the PMI Code of Ethics and
     Professional Conduct. Responsibility is concerned with making decisions that are for the
     good of the organization.

 40. C. Referent power refers to power that is inferred to the influencer by their subordinates.
     For example, project team members may have a high level of regard for their project
     manager and therefore willingly go along with a decision that the PM makes. Formal
     power is also known as legitimate power, not referent power.

 41. A. Deliverables are an input, not an output, of the Manage Project Knowledge process.
     The remaining options represent all outputs of the process.

 42. C. One of the most important criteria for evaluating sellers is to determine whether they
     have a clear understanding of what you're asking them to do or perform. Information
     such as past performance, financial records, and predetermined performance criteria are
     also important, but only after you are sure they have a clear understanding of what you're
     asking them to do.

 43. D. It is the processes within the Monitoring and Controlling process group that track,
     review, and regulate the progress and performance of the project, not the Executing
     processes.

 44. D. The project team members, project manager, and the stakeholders are all equally
     responsible for the quality assurance of the project.

 45. A. Corrective actions are taken as a result of comparing and monitoring project
     performance against the baseline. The baseline is the project management plan.
     Deviations that are discovered during the course of the project may or may not require
     corrective actions. Preventive actions are taken to reduce the probability of negative
     consequences, and defect repairs are submitted to correct product defects.
                                              Chapter 3: Executing (Domain 3.0)              267



46. C. The Expectancy Theory proposes that the expectation of a positive outcome drives
    motivation. Motivation may drive negative behaviors as well as positive ones. The
    Responsibility domain covers several elements including the following: ensuring integrity,
    accepting assignments, laws and regulations compliance, and confidential information.
    Accepting assignments concerns being honest about your qualifications, and fudging your
    experience is dishonest.

47. A. Legitimate power, also known as formal power, comes about as a result of the
    influencer's position. For example, team members may agree to go along with an executive
    simply as a result of their position.

48. C. The stages of team development are as follows: forming, storming, norming, and
    performing. This model was developed by Tuckman-Jensen, and whenever a new member
    is added, the team reverts to the forming stage of development.

49. B. The requisition stage is where the procurement documents are prepared (not the
    responses to them) and is associated with the Plan Procurement Management process.
    The two outputs that become inputs are procurement documentation and source selection
    criteria.

50. A. Flowcharts, a tool and technique of the Manage Quality process, show a series of steps
    that lead to a defect. Flowcharts are part of data representation.

51. B. The Contingency Theory proposes that people are motivated to achieve levels of
    competency and will continue to be motivated even after the competency is reached. The
    area of the role delineation study this question refers to is contributing to the project
    management knowledge base.

52. D. The team is currently in the storming phase of Tuckman's team development model.
    In this phase, the team members begin to address the project work and are not yet
    collaborative or open with each other.

53. D. According to the PMBOK(R) Guide, quality is everyone's activities, including the
    project manager, project team, project sponsor, and organization's management.

54. C. The Acquire Resources process is concerned with all resources for the project, both
    existing staff members and consultants or external staff. The procurement processes are
    used to obtain the staff members, and the Acquire Resources process involves attaining
    and assigning resources.

55. C. Quality assurance may be provided by a third party from outside the organization,
    by an internal QA department, or by the project team. There is no general rule that it
    is generally provided by outside sources. According to the PMBOK(R) Guide, project
    managers have the greatest impact on quality during this process.

56. C. This question describes a transactional leadership style. Transactional leaders are
    autocratic, activity focused, and autonomous; they use contingent reward systems and
    manage by exception.
268        Answers Appendix



 57. A. This question describes a manager, not a leader. The Responsibility domain covers the
     concept of confidential information.

 58. D. Quality reports, an output of the Manage Quality process, typically include quality
     management issues escalated; recommendations for process, project, and product
     improvements; corrective actions recommendations; and summary of quality control
     findings.

 59. A. The organizational process assets input for the Acquire Resources process considers
     things such as the organization's recruitment procedures and processes. You hired
     your friend on the spot, so important steps in the process could have been missed. 
     Pre-assignment is when resources are assigned prior to the project start.

 60. A. The tools and techniques of the Manage Stakeholder Engagement process are the
     following: expert judgment, communication skills (feedback), interpersonal and team
     skills (conflict management, cultural awareness, negotiation, observation/conversation,
     political awareness), ground rules, and meetings. Communication skills, while valuable,
     are a tool and technique used in the Monitor Stakeholder Engagement process.

 61. B. Within a project environment, conflict is inevitable. The key is how conflict is dealt
     with and managed.

 62. A. This process is used only if you are obtaining goods and services outside the
     organization.

 63. B. Kaylee and Alyssa used the collaborate technique, also referred to as problem-solving.
     This technique involves getting multiple viewpoints from differing perspectives and
     reaching consensus and commitment after having an open dialogue. It is considered a
     win-win conflict-resolution technique.

 64. A. Virtual teams may not work in the same location, but they all share the goals of the
     project and have a role to fulfill.

 65. A. According to the PMBOK(R) Guide, quality assurance is most concerned with using
     project processes effectively. This includes assuring stakeholders that the end result of the
     project will meet their needs and expectations.

 66. C. In the performing phase, the team members reach the point where they are performing
     as a well-organized unit; they are interdependent, and they work well through the issues.
     Other options describe the forming, storming, and norming phases.

 67. D. Theory Y managers believe that people will give you their best if they know what's
     expected of them and they have the proper motivation.

 68. B. This question describes inputs and tools and techniques of the Manage Quality
     process. All of these options are correct, but the most important point to remember
     about this process is that the quality processes you use will help make certain the project
     satisfies the quality standards as outlined in the project management plan.

 69. D. Composite resource calendars are a type of resource calendar and are an output of the
     Acquire Resources process that includes availability and skills and abilities.
                                              Chapter 3: Executing (Domain 3.0)              269



70. C. The question describes the Develop Team process, and that's also where the stages of
    team development are described.

71. C. According to the PMBOK(R) Guide, project teams spend effort in identifying and
    analyzing risks and developing risk responses but then take no action in managing the
    risk.

72. C. The Direct and Manage Project Work process is responsible for implementing
    approved change requests, not approving them. Change requests are processed through
    the Perform Integrated Change Control process.

73. A. Conduct Procurements is the process where proposal evaluation (through the data
    analysis tool and technique) is used to choose a seller and award a contract.

74. A. The project management plan is a compilation of plans and baselines and is considered
    to represent the project baseline. Once work is executed, progress will be measured
    against this plan.

75. C. The Executing process group is where you should compare and monitor project
    performance against the baseline in order to implement corrective actions at the right
    time. The primary focus of the Monitoring and Controlling process group is to take
    measurements and perform inspections to find out whether there are variances in the plan.

76. C. Of the options presented, the Implement Risk Responses process is the best option
    of those presented. While some risk responses are implemented when risk triggers occur,
    others are implemented immediately to avoid or exploit a risk.

77. B. Team performance assessments are an output of Develop Team process, not Acquire
    Resources.

78. A. This question refers to the data analysis tools and techniques in the Manage Quality
    process.

79. D. This question describes the Direct and Manage Project Work process. Approved
    changes are one of the inputs of this process. The daydream involves a conflict-of-interest
    situation. Thank goodness it was only a dream.

80. A. Smoothing, also known as accommodating, emphasizes areas of agreement rather than
    areas of difference.

81. B. Manage Communications is concerned with ensuring the timely and appropriate
    collection, creation, distribution, storage, retrieval, management, monitoring, and
    ultimate disposition of project information. In this scenario, the project manager is
    utilizing communication skills.

82. C. This question describes the affinity diagram, which is a data representation tool and
    technique. Affinity diagrams pinpoint which areas should get the most focus by grouping
    related potential causes of defects.
270        Answers Appendix



 83. B. You are in the Manage Quality process and have performed a quality audit. Quality
     audits are performed to determine inefficient or ineffective processes, policies, procedures,
     and guidelines and, when performed correctly, determine if the product is fit for use, if
     applicable laws and standards are followed, if corrective actions are necessary, and more.

 84. D. According to the PMBOK(R) Guide, corrective action is an intentional activity that
     realigns the performance of the project work with the project management plan; in other
     words, it's work that brings the project back in line with the plan.

 85. B. Approved change requests are an input to the Direct and Manage Project Work
     process. This process will be repeated in order to implement the change. Approved change
     requests come about as a result of the approved change requests output of the Perform
     Integrated Change Control process. There is not enough information in the question to
     determine if the scope has increased, so neither C nor D is correct.

 86. C. The tools and techniques of the Acquire Resources process are: pre-assignment,
     interpersonal and team skills (negotiation), virtual teams, and decision-making
     (multicriterion decision analysis). Resource calendars are an output of this process.

 87. C. The matrix diagrams tool includes two-dimensional and three-dimensional diagrams.
     It is a part of the data representation tools and techniques of the Manage Quality process.

 88. B. The risk register contains the list of identified risks and all information documented
     about them, including the risk response plans. As risk triggers occur, they will need to
     refer to the risk register for information about the risk response plans.

 89. B. This question describes the Acquire Resources process because it states you will
     be hiring virtual team members from across the globe. Virtual teams are a tool and
     technique of this process. Because of the diversity of the team, you should pay particular
     attention to cultural awareness and perhaps provide diversity training.

 90. C. Conflict resolution techniques include the following: withdraw/avoid, smooth/
     accommodate, compromise/reconcile, force/direct, collaborate/problem-solve.

 91. B. Advertising is a tool and technique of the Conduct Procurements process. It helps to
     expand the list of possible sellers that the team can choose from. The end result is, ideally,
     a decision about which sellers will be selected to provide the needed goods or services. All
     other options provided in the question are outputs of the Plan Procurement Management
     process.

 92. A. Since the question states you are meeting to discuss details of the contract, you are
     using the procurement negotiation tool and technique, which is part of interpersonal
     and team skills. Proposal evaluation is used prior to deciding among multiple responses.
     Procurement negotiations are used to come to agreement on the contract.

 93. A. Change requests are typically a means of taking corrective or preventive actions or
     performing defect repairs. Updates to project documents will typically occur as a result of
     implementing a change request.
                                                  Chapter 3: Executing (Domain 3.0)                  271



 94. D. The scenario notes that two critical activities are already delayed, meaning that an
     issue has been identified and must be addressed. While updates to the plan are likely, they
     will be the result of corrective action taken.

 95. B. Rewards and recognition systems are formal ways of promoting desirable behavior.

 96. C. This team member seems to have a problem with interpersonal skills, which is a tool
     and technique of the Develop Team process.

 97. C. Managing quality is sometimes referred to as quality assurance. Manage Quality is
     a process within the Project Quality Management Knowledge Area. According to the
     PMBOK(R) Guide, the term manage quality is meant to encompass a broader meaning,
     including representing non-project work.

 98. B. Alyssa is in the process of performing the Develop Team process. This process is
     concerned with improving competencies, team member interaction, and the overall team
     environment to enhance project performance.

 99. B. Completing a quality audit may lead you to the conclusion that a change request is
     needed, but you must submit a change request and/or take corrective action to implement
     the quality improvement.

100. D. The primary input of the Conduct Procurements process is procurement
     documentation. Procurement documentation contains responses to RFPs, RFIs, and so
     on, and the responses are prepared by the seller of the product or services. This is an
     output of the Plan Procurement Management process.

101. D. This question describes the Conduct Procurements process. Make-or-buy decisions
     is one of the inputs of this process, and bidder conferences and proposal evaluation
     techniques are two of the tools and techniques of this process. Since you know the vendor,
     even though you haven't seen this person recently, you should be concerned about a
     conflict-of-interest situation.

102. B. Theory Z was developed by Dr. William Ouchi. This theory is concerned with
     increasing employee loyalty to their organizations. This theory results in increased
     productivity, it puts an emphasis on the well-being of the employees both at work
     and outside of work, it encourages steady employment, and it leads to high employee
     satisfaction and morale.

103. A. An agreement is a mutually binding agreement that obligates the seller to provide
     a specific set of products, services, or results. It typically contains a lot of information,
     such as the procurement statement of work or major deliverables, when the goods or
     services will be produced, reporting, associated terms, and other relevant information.
     Agreements are an output of the Conduct Procurements process.

104. A. This team member is describing the self-actualization level of Maslow's Hierarchy of
     Needs.

105. B. While the project management plan is technically a correct answer, the question
     specifically refers to the resource management plan (a component of the project
     management plan).
272        Answers Appendix



106. A. This describes the adjourning stage of team development.

107. A. As a project manager, it is your responsibility to contribute to the project management
     knowledge base, which includes educating others on project management practices.
     Independent estimates is a tool and technique of the Plan Procurement Management.

108. D. This question describes the process analysis tool and technique. Process analysis looks
     at process improvements from an organizational and technical perspective. It examines
     problems and constraints experienced while conducting the work of the project, and it
     identifies inefficient and ineffective processes.

109. A. Withdrawal happens when one of the parties leaves and/or refuses to discuss the
     conflict. This is a lose-lose conflict-resolution technique and never results in a resolution.

110. A. The Expectancy Theory, proposed by Victor Vroom, states that the expectation of a
     positive outcome drives motivation. In other words, people will behave in certain ways if
     they think there will be good rewards for doing so.

111. B. This question references the Manage Communications process, which is responsible
     for ensuring the timely distribution of project information. Project management plan,
     project documents, work performance reports, enterprise environmental factors, and
     organizational process assets are all inputs of the process. The remaining options
     presented are tools and techniques of the process, not inputs.

112. A. Collaborate is also called problem-solving and should be the technique most
     commonly used by project managers.

113. C. The team is currently in the norming stage, where they are working together well and
     where team members adjust their work habits and behaviors to support the team.

114. B. You are in the Manage Quality process. This process is responsible for translating
     the quality management plan into executable-quality activities that incorporate the
     organization's quality policies into the project.

115. D. You could conduct a team celebration, thank your team members for their
     contributions, and guide them through a closure process.

116. C. Receivers are the ones who filter information they receive through their knowledge of
     the subject, cultural influences, language, emotions, attitudes, and geographic locations.
     Senders should keep this in mind when preparing their messages. Senders are responsible
     for communicating the information clearly and concisely, and receivers are responsible for
     understanding the information correctly.

117. A. Enterprise environmental factors are both internal and external factors that can
     influence or impact a project. In the Acquire Resources process, enterprise environmental
     factors is a key input that represents existing information on organizational resources,
     such as availability, experience levels, interests, costs, and competence levels.

118. D. Activities such as team building, motivating, and recognition and rewards are a means
     of improving teamwork, motivating employees, reducing attrition, and improving overall
     project performance.
                                                 Chapter 3: Executing (Domain 3.0)              273



119. A. The question describes two different levels of Maslow's Hierarchy of Needs: social
     needs and self-esteem needs.

120. C. You should always maintain respect and professional demeanor when interacting with
     others. You can't control their actions, but you can control your own. This question refers
     to the Conduct Procurements process. Procurement negotiation is a tool and technique of
     this process.

121. C. Rianna is currently performing the Manage Team process. This process is concerned
     with tracking team member performance, providing feedback, resolving issues, and
     managing team changes to optimize project performance.

122. B. The Hygiene Theory states that hygiene and motivators are the two factors that
     contribute to motivators. Hygiene factors deal with work environment issues. Motivators
     deal with the substance of the work itself and the satisfaction one derives from performing
     the functions of the job.

123. C. Douglas McGregor defined two models of worker behavior, Theory X and Theory Y,
     that attempt to explain how different managers deal with their team members. Theory X
     managers believe most people do not like work and will try to steer clear of it; they believe
     people have little to no ambition, need constant supervision, and won't actually perform
     the duties of their job unless threatened.

124. B. This question describes the characteristics of an effective team.

125. D. This question describes the collaborate/problem-solve style of conflict resolution. This
     style allows for discussion of multiple viewpoints and the examination of all perspectives
     of the issue.

126. B. The Tuckman ladder, developed by Bruce Tuckman, is a team development model that
     identifies the various stages of development that a team goes through together.

127. C. According to the PMBOK(R) Guide, virtual teams can be defined as groups of people
     with a shared goal who fulfill their roles with little or no time spent meeting face to face.

128. D. The best answer to this question is Theory Y. Theory Y managers believe people are
     interested in performing at their best, given the right motivation and proper expectation.
     They support their teams, are concerned about team members, and are good listeners.

129. A. This question lists all the outputs of the Manage Stakeholder Engagement process. The
     issue log is used more like an action item log in this process.

130. A. This question describes expert power on the part of the brilliant teammate and a
     democratic leadership style because team members were asked for input before a decision
     was made.

131. A. Rianna is currently performing the Manage Team process, which includes managing
     conflict. This process is concerned with tracking team member performance, providing
     feedback, resolving issues, and managing team changes to optimize project performance.
274        Answers Appendix



132. A. The question refers to the Direct and Manage Project Work process, which is
     responsible for leading and performing the work defined in the project management
     plan and implementing any changes that have been approved. This is where the project
     manager provides the overall management of the work being executed. Inputs to this
     process include the project management plan, project documents, approved change
     requests, enterprise environmental factors, and organizational process assets. Expert
     judgment is a tool and technique, while issue log and work performance data are outputs
     of the process.

133. B. According to the PMI Code of Ethics and Professional Conduct, you should
     always report the truth regarding project status. This question refers to the Manage
     Communications process. All of the tools and techniques of this process are listed in the
     opening of the question.

134. A. This question describes the deliverables output of the Direct and Manage Project Work
     process.

135. B. Knowledge can be split into explicit or tacit knowledge. Tacit knowledge refers to
     knowledge that is difficult to express, such as insights, experience, beliefs, and
     know-how.

136. D. Most conflicts in the Manage Team process come about as a result of scheduling
     issues, availability of resources, or personal work habits.

137. C. The Contingency Theory is a combination of Theory Y and the Hygiene Theory. It
     states that people are motivated to achieve levels of competency even after competency is
     reached.

138. C. Manage communications outputs include project communications, project
     management plan updates, project documents updates, and organizational process assets
     updates.

139. B. You have just performed the Acquire Resources process, which is a process belonging
     to the Project Resource Management Knowledge Area. The process that is likely to follow,
     based on the options provided, is the Develop Team process.

140. B. Direct and Manage Project Work is where the work of the project is performed.
     Activities are clarified, the work is authorized to begin, and resources are committed to
     the project and the work performed.

141. C. The Conduct Procurements process results in selected sellers, agreements, change
     requests, and updates to the project documents and project management plan. The
     Acquire Resources process is responsible for acquiring internal resources, while the
     Conduct Procurements process focuses on acquiring external ones.

142. A. The Role Delineation Study covered in the PMI Code of Ethics and Professional
     Conduct covers four areas, including promoting interaction among team members and
     other stakeholders. This question describes the purpose of the Manage Stakeholder
     Engagement process.
                                                Chapter 3: Executing (Domain 3.0)              275



143. C. Maslow's Hierarchy of Needs notes that there are five sets of needs that must be met
     in the following hierarchical order: basic physical needs, safety and security needs, social
     needs, self-esteem needs, self-actualization. The idea is that these needs must be met
     before the person can move to the next level of needs in the hierarchy.

144. A. Legitimate, or formal, power comes as a result of the influencer's position.

145. D. A purchase order, memorandum of understanding, agreement, and subcontract are all
     terms for a contract according to the PMBOK(R) Guide.

146. A. The Tuckman ladder, developed by Bruce Tuckman, is a team development model that
     identifies the various stages of development that a team goes through together.

147. D. The communications management plan is implemented during the Manage
     Communications process, which is the process this question describes.

148. B. The Manage Team process has several inputs, including the following: resource
     management plan (through the project management plan), project documents (issue
     log, lessons learned register, project team assignments, team charter), team performance
     assessments, work performance reports, enterprise environmental factors, and
     organizational process assets. Project management information system is a tool and
     technique of this process.

149. B. McClelland is behind the Achievement Theory, which states that people are motivated
     by achievement, power, and affiliation.

150. C. The elements of communication involve senders, receivers, and messages. The
     communication model, a tool and technique of the Manage Communications process,
     includes encoding, decoding, acknowledging, and feedback/response. Verbal and written
     are forms of communication.

151. D. Project team assignments are an output of the Acquire Resources process, not an
     input. All other options presented are inputs of the process.

152. A. Team performance assessments are an output of this process and involve determining
     and documenting a team's effectiveness.

153. D. Face-to-face meetings are effective, but this statement is not true regarding status
     review meetings.

154. B. This describes the interpersonal and team skills tool and technique of the Acquire
     Resources process, which encompasses negotiation.

155. D. Maslow's Hierarchy of Needs notes that there are five sets of needs that must be met
     in the following hierarchical order: basic physical needs, safety and security needs, social
     needs, self-esteem needs, self-actualization. The idea is that these needs must be met
     before the person can move to the next level of needs in the hierarchy.

156. A. Knowledge can be split into explicit or tacit knowledge. Explicit knowledge refers to
     knowledge that can be codified using pictures, numbers, or words.
276        Answers Appendix



157. A. The Manage Team process has two tools and techniques: interpersonal and team skills
     and project management information system.

158. D. A project manager or other stakeholders may use various types of power to get work
     done. Punishment, expert, legitimate, and referent are all types of power.

159. A. You have just performed a quality audit and identified a need for a corrective action.

160. C. The Manage Team process is concerned with individual team members and their
     performance. Manage Resource Plan is not a valid process.

161. C. The question refers to a key input of the Direct and Manage Project Work process,
     which is a process that provides overall management of the project work and deliverables.
     While several inputs are important, without the approved change requests, you cannot
     complete the activities referenced in the question.



Chapter 4: Monitoring and Controlling
(Domain 4.0)
  1. A. Change control systems are a subset of the configuration management system.
     Configuration management systems are a subset of the project management information
     system.

  2. C. The Direct and Manage Project Work process--part of the Executing process group--
     is responsible for the execution of the work, not the Monitor and Control Project Work
     process.

  3. C. This question describes the Validate Scope process. The tools and techniques of this
     process are inspection and decision-making.

  4. A. The question describes the Monitor Communications and Monitor Stakeholder
     Engagement processes. Both processes evaluate the results of communication and
     stakeholder engagement activities and compare them against the desired outcomes. Based
     on the comparison, adjustments to these activities may be made.

  5. A. To calculate schedule variance, subtract planned value from earned value (SV =
     EV - PV): $500 - $700 = -$200. A negative schedule variance means that the project is
     behind schedule.

  6. B. Claims administration involves documenting, monitoring, and managing contested
     changes. Contested changes are resolved using alternative dispute resolution processes,
     such as arbitration, when parties cannot reach an agreement.

  7. B. Work performance information is a key input that the project manager needs
     to evaluate performance against the plan (another key input in and of itself). Work
     performance data, on the other hand, represents raw data that is used in executing the
     work; it later becomes information as it is analyzed against baselines through other
                           Chapter 4: Monitoring and Controlling (Domain 4.0)               277



    processes that belong to the Monitor and Control process group. The remaining two
    options are tools and techniques of the process, not inputs.

 8. A. ETC when variances are atypical is BAC - EV.

 9. D. The tools and techniques of the Perform Integrated Change Control process are expert
    judgment, change control tools, data analysis, decision-making, and meetings.

10. B. A TCPI of 1.0 means that the project must continue performing at its current level of
    efficiency to complete within specified targets.

11. A. The purpose of the Control Costs process is to monitor the status of the project to
    update the project costs and manage changes to the cost baseline. It is the Determine
    Budget process, not Control Costs, which aggregates estimates to establish an authorized
    cost baseline.

12. A. The formula for CPI is EV / AC; therefore, $114 / $103 = $1.1. The formula for SPI is
    EV / PV; therefore, $114 / $120 = .$95.

13. D. The project manager has just completed the Direct and Manage Project Work
    process, eliminating this as the best option. Although the Executing and Monitoring
    and Controlling processes are iterative and overlap, the best choice of those presented is
    the Monitor and Control Project Work process. This process is responsible for tracking,
    reviewing, and reporting overall progress against the plan. In this case, results and
    performance of the deliverable produced will be evaluated against the plan. While it is
    possible that change control is another process that will be performed (many times on any
    given project), you do not have sufficient information to select this as the best option.

14. B. Carina is using the earned value analysis technique of the Control Costs process.
    Earned value analysis compares the performance measurement baseline against actual
    performance, such as actual schedule progress and costs.

15. B. David is currently performing the Validate Scope process. This process is responsible
    for formalizing the acceptance of the completed project deliverables.

16. D. The most common formula for EAC is AC + bottom-up ETC. Plugging in the numbers
    from the question, you get $138 + $62 = $200.

17. D. Inspection may involve a simple or physical review of the work performed by a
    contractor. It is structured in nature and is meant to ensure that a mutual understanding
    exists of the work in progress.

18. D. LaFawnduh is performing the Monitor Stakeholder Engagement process. Specifically,
    she is using the multicriteria decision analysis tool, which is a subset of the decision-
    making tool and technique of the process.

19. C. The Monitoring and Controlling process group has a total of 12 processes. Note
    that the majority of these processes have either the word Control or Monitor within
    their names, providing a helpful hint if asked this question on the exam. Other processes
    belonging to this process group include the following: Control Scope, Control Schedule,
    Control Costs, Control Quality, Control Resources, Monitor Communications, Monitor
    Risks, Control Procurements, and Monitor Stakeholder Engagement.
278        Answers Appendix



 20. B. Approved change requests are an output of the Perform Integrated Change Control
     process.

 21. B. Sally failed to keep Roshoud, as the project sponsor, informed and up to date. The
     scenario notes that he heard of the resource gaps and had to approach Sally to get
     clarification.

 22. D. Since EAC is based on actual costs to date, and assuming ETC work will be completed
     at the budgeted rate, the equation to use for EAC is EAC = AC + (BAC - EV). In this case,
     your formula looks like this: $425 + ($900 - $475) = $850.

 23. A. The outputs of the Validate Scope process are accepted deliverables, work performance
     information, change requests, and project documents updates. Deliverables are verified as
     part of the Control Quality process.

 24. A. Claims administration is a tool and technique of the Control Procurements process.
     This involves documenting, monitoring, and managing contested changes to the contract.
     Specifically, the project manager in this scenario is using arbitration, which involves
     bringing all parties to the table with a third, disinterested party who is not a participant
     in the contract to try to reach an agreement.

 25. C. The formula for TCPI when targeting EAC is as follows: TCPI = (BAC - EV) / (EAC - AC).
     Plug in the values to get the following: ($15,000 - $10,000) / ($17,000 - $12,000) = $1.0.

 26. A. This is the estimate to complete (ETC) calculation, which will estimate the remaining
     work of the project. The ETC calculation is part of the forecasting tool and technique of
     the Control Costs process.

 27. D. This question describes the project documents updates output of this process. In
     addition to the documents stated in the question, this output updates supporting schedules
     and approved and unapproved changes.

 28. D. Cost forecasts is an output of the Control Costs process, not a tool and technique.
     Tools and techniques of the process include the following: expert judgment, data analysis
     (earned value analysis, variance analysis, trend analysis, reserve analysis), to-complete
     performance index, and project management information system.

 29. B. The Control Procurements process is responsible for managing procurement
     relationships, monitoring contract performance, making changes and corrections as
     appropriate, and closing out contracts. Once changes are processed through the change
     control board (via the Perform Change Control Process), they are applied through the
     Control Procurements process.

 30. C. The to-complete performance index (TCPI) is the projected cost performance the
     remaining work of the project must achieve in order to meet the BAC or EAC.

 31. C. The change control board is officially chartered and given the authority to approve or
     deny change requests as defined by the organization and as outlined within the project
     management plan. The authority level (including exception or emergency process) should
     be detailed within the project management plan.
                           Chapter 4: Monitoring and Controlling (Domain 4.0)                    279



32. B. Earned value (EV) is the value of the work that's actually been completed. Planned
    value (PV) is the budgeted amount planned for work to be completed during a given time
    period, and actual cost (AC) is the cost of work completed during a given time period.
    EAC is a forecasting technique that is an estimate of the expected total cost of a work
    component.

33. D. The purpose of the Monitor Risks process is to monitor risk response plans, track
    identified risks, identify and analyze new risks, and evaluate the effectiveness of the
    risk processes. As part of carrying out this process, risk review meetings may be held to
    examine and document the effectiveness of risk responses in dealing with overall project
    risks and individual project risks.

34. D. The procurement documentation contains a variety of useful information relating
    to the agreement signed with a vendor, including the statement of work, payment
    information, performance information, and any other correspondence with the vendor.
    While the project management plan and agreement are two other key inputs, they
    alone do not provide sufficient information for the meeting with Nicolas. This type of
    discussion and analysis occurs as part of performing the Control Procurements process,
    and procurement documentation is a key input of the process.

35. B. The change control board (CCB) is responsible for reviewing all change requests
    and approving them or denying them. They are sometimes also known as a technical
    assessment board, technical review board, or engineering review board.

36. B. The performance measurement baseline consists of the schedule, scope, and cost
    baseline. The cost baseline does not include management reserves; therefore, the PMB
    does not include them.

37. A. This question describes the Monitor Stakeholder Engagement process. Keeping
    stakeholders engaged will help overall project success, and it will keep them up to date on
    issues and status.

38. C. This describes a risk review, which is a tool and technique used within the Monitor
    Risks process, as part of "meetings" held. According to the PMBOK (R) Guide, risk
    reviews are scheduled regularly and should evaluate and capture whether risk responses
    implemented are effective in dealing with identified project and individual risks.

39. B. There are several viable options included, most notably Control Schedule and Control
    Resources. Since the project manager is presently negotiating for resources, the best
    option is the Control Resources process. As part of this process, the project manager uses
    their interpersonal and team skills to influence and negotiate for resources.

40. D. Trend analysis is a mathematical formula used to forecast future outcomes and predict
    project trends. It is not a tool for analyzing how problems occur. It is part of the data
    analysis tool and technique of the Control Costs process.

41. B. Trend analysis is part of the data analysis tool and technique. It is used to determine
    whether project performance is improving or worsening over time.
280        Answers Appendix



 42. D. Control Procurements is the third and last of the processes that belong to the
     Procurement Management Knowledge Area.

 43. D. You are currently performing activities associated with the Control Schedule process,
     which is part of the Monitoring and Controlling process group.

 44. D. While Monitor and Control Project Work represents another great option, David is
     likely to place extra emphasis on the Control Scope process. This process ensures that the
     approved scope, and only the approved scope, is completed. Any changes are managed
     according to the formal change control process.

 45. C. Scope changes might affect the schedule, cost, quality, and other processes and should
     be thoroughly integrated with all the Monitoring and Controlling processes. Scope
     changes may reduce the project requirements and thus reduce the number or hours needed
     to complete the project. This, in turn, could cause a reduction in the project budget.

 46. C. Inspection is an important tool and technique of the Validate Scope process. The
     purpose is to inspect work and deliverables to ensure that they meet requirements and
     product acceptance criteria. If the deliverables pass inspection and receive sign-off, they
     are formally considered accepted deliverables--a major output of this process.

 47. C. This question describes the Monitor Stakeholder Engagement process. The tools
     and techniques of this process are data analysis, decision-making, data representation,
     communication skills, interpersonal and team skills, and meetings. Ground rules are a
     tool and technique of the Manage Stakeholder Engagement process.

 48. A. Leads and lags are adjusted during the Control Schedule process and are typically not
     established here for the first time. Leads and lags are first considered as part of performing
     the Sequence Activities process and again later in the Develop Schedule process.

 49. C. The main purpose of the Control Quality process tools and techniques is to examine
     the product, service, or result as well as the project processes for conformity to standards.
     They are used with the Plan-Do-Check-Act cycle to help identify and resolve problems
     related to quality defects.

 50. D. Both processes are responsible for carrying out closure activities when it comes to
     procurements. The closed procurements output is a result of Control Procurements,
     where completed requirements are validated against the contract; administrative closure
     of procurements occurs through the Close Project or Phase process, including archiving
     related documentation.

 51. B. Attributes sampling is an inspection measurement technique with only two
     possibilities: conforming or nonconforming. In other words, the measurements conform
     (meet the requirement), or they do not conform. This can also be considered a pass/fail or
     go/no-go decision.

 52. D. To calculate schedule variance, subtract planned value from earned value
     (CV = EV - AC): $500 - $450 = $50. A positive cost variance means that the project
     is under budget.
                            Chapter 4: Monitoring and Controlling (Domain 4.0)                281



53. B. To calculate EAC when the future work will be accomplished at the planned rate, use
    the following formula: AC + BAC - EV. Plug in the values provided in the question to
    arrive at the following: $15,000 + $20,000 - $18,000 = $17,000.

54. D. Configuration status accounting is an activity that is associated with the configuration
    management system. This activity documents and stores the status of changes and the
    information needed to effectively manage product information.

55. C. According to the PMBOK(R) Guide, the purpose of the Control Schedule process is to
    monitor the status of the project to update the project schedule and manage changes to the
    schedule baseline.

56. A. Technical performance analysis compares the technical accomplishments of project
    milestones completed during the Executing process to the technical milestones defined in
    the project Planning process. This type of analysis is a tool and technique of the Monitor
    Risks process.

57. B. This question describes the change control tools tool and technique of this process.
    Change control tools help in managing this process by tracking and recording change
    requests, recording decisions regarding their disposition, and distributing the change
    request decisions to appropriate stakeholders.

58. A. The tools and techniques of the Monitor Communications process include expert
    judgment, project management information system, data representation, interpersonal
    and team skills, and meetings. The other options are used to carry out the other two
    communications-related processes.

59. C. The project manager is responsible for ensuring that changes are managed properly
    throughout the project's life cycle and that the organization's change control policies are
    followed.

60. B. Common causes of variances are the result of random variances, known or predictable
    variances, or variances that are always present in the process.

61. D. To calculate variance at completion, subtract the estimate at completion from the
    budget at completion (BAC - EAC): $550,000 - $525,000 = $25,000.

62. B. Work performance information includes information regarding the status of risks (in
    the case of the Monitor Risks process), the status of change requests, and more. Work
    performance data and work performance reports are both inputs to this process.

63. D. The Control Procurements process is responsible for managing procurement
    relationships, monitoring contract performance, making changes and corrections as
    appropriate, and closing out contracts.

64. B. Reporting templates, communication policies, communication technologies, and
    security issues surrounding data, communicating methods, and records retention policies
    are all part of the organizational process assets input of the Monitor Communications
    process, not the project communications input.
282        Answers Appendix



 65. B. The question describes the Monitor Communications process. This process involves
     ensuring the information needs of the project and its stakeholders are met; the project man-
     ager determines whether the communications planned are achieving the desired results.

 66. B. Change requests may take the form of preventive or corrective actions or workarounds.
     It's not too late to take preventive action in the Monitoring and Controlling process
     group.

 67. A. Kaylee has just performed the Implement Risk Responses process and is likely to carry
     out activities associated with the Monitor Risks process next. Risk reviews are a tool and
     technique used to evaluate the effectiveness of risk responses that have been implemented.

 68. C. When projects end prematurely, the Validate Scope process is where the level of detail
     concerning the amount of work completed should be documented.

 69. A. To determine performance against the budget, you must first calculate variance at
     completion. To calculate variance at completion, subtract the estimate at completion from
     the budget at completion (BAC - EAC): $550,000 - $525,000 = $25,000. A positive VAC
     means that the project is performing under the planned costs.

 70. A. The project management plan updates involve any updates to the schedule baseline,
     the schedule management plan, and/or the cost baseline.

 71. C. Generating status reports is an activity that belongs to the Monitor and Control
     Project Work process, which is part of the Monitoring and Controlling process group. The
     key output of this process is work performance reports.

 72. B. Control Quality includes verifying that approved changes have been implemented
     correctly. This may involve carrying out additional activities-such as retesting.

 73. C. The configuration management system, used in the Perform Integrated Change
     Control process, documents the physical characteristics of the product of the project and
     ensures that the description is accurate and complete.

 74. A. According to the PMBOK (R) Guide, scope creep refers to the uncontrolled expansion of
     product or project scope without adjustments to time, cost, and resources; in other words,
     it is scope that has not been approved.

 75. C. Schedule variance tells you whether the schedule is ahead or behind what was planned
     for this period and is calculated by subtracting PV from EV. In this case, the formula
     looks like this: 95 - 85 = 10. The resulting number is positive, which means the project is
     ahead of schedule for this time period.

 76. A. A histogram is a form of bar chart that can be used to show the number of defects by
     source or component.

 77. C. The formula for ETC when variances are expected to continue is ETC = (BAC - EV) / CPI.
     First you need to calculate CPI, which is $925 / $925 = $1. Now you can plug in the
     numbers: ($1,400 - $925) / 1 = $475.
                            Chapter 4: Monitoring and Controlling (Domain 4.0)                 283



78. C. The project manager will need to analyze the impact of the scope change and what
    options exist, such as whether to undo what has been completed or analyze whether the
    scope change should be approved. This should occur through the formal change control
    process via a change request.

79. B. If the critical path tasks have variances, your schedule is at risk. You will use corrective
    actions at this point (not preventive actions) to get the project back on track, such as
    adjusting the amount of buffer. Significant delays to noncritical-path tasks can make them
    become part of the critical path.

80. B. Status reports are an example of a work performance report, an output of the Monitor
    and Control Project Work process. Work performance reports may be simple or highly
    detailed, depending on the nature of what is being reported.

81. C. Variance at completion reflects a projection of the amount of budget deficit or surplus,
    calculated as the difference between the budget at completion and the estimate at completion.

82. B. Cost variance tells you whether costs are above or below what was planned for this
    period and are calculated by subtracting AC from EV. In this case, the formula looks like
    this: $95 - $100 = -$5. The resulting number is negative, which means the project costs
    are lower than what was planned for this time period.

83. A. Scope changes will cause schedule revisions, but schedule revisions do not change the
    project scope. Project requirements are part of the project scope statement, and therefore
    option D is one of the correct responses.

84. A. The project manager has asked Yazzy to calculate estimate to complete (ETC). When
    the work is proceeding as planned, use the following ETC formula: EAC - AC. Plug in the
    values to get the following: $75,000 - $50,000 = $25,000.

85. C. Only critical path activities will cause schedule delays unless one or more of the
    noncritical-path activities have used up all their float time. This question doesn't specify
    that a noncritical-path activity has used all its float time.

86. C. VAC is calculated this way: VAC = BAC - EAC. Therefore, $600 - $560 = $40.

87. B. Data analysis is a tool and technique used within the Perform Integrated Change
    Control process, where change requests are evaluated by the change control board. As
    part of performing data analysis, alternatives are considered, and a cost-benefit analysis is
    performed to determine whether the changes proposed are worth the associated costs.

88. D. The Monitor and Control Project Work process involves all of the activities identified
    in the question. Monitor Communications, Monitor Risks, and Perform Integrated
    Change Control each have some of these activities too, but Monitor and Control Project
    Work is the only process that incorporates all of the activities listed.

89. D. As part of performing activities associated with the Control Quality process, root-
    cause analysis is a technique used to identify the source of defects.

90. B. The formula for TCPI when using BAC is (BAC - EV) / (BAC - AC). For this question,
    the formula is as follows: ($1,800 - $1,680) / ($1,800 - $1,700) = $1.2.
284        Answers Appendix



 91. A. The EAC formula for this question is BAC / CPI. First, calculate CPI, which is EV / AC:
     $145 / $138 = $1.05. Plugging in the numbers from the question, you get $200 / $1.05 = $190.

 92. A. Options C and D are not viable responses because the question is asking for an
     estimate at completion, not an estimate to complete. When changes in performance or
     risks occur on the project, it may cause BAC to no longer make sense. When that is the
     case, switch to the EAC to project the cost at completion.

 93. A. To calculate CPI, use the following formula: CPI = EV / AC. Plug in the values to
     calculate the following: $1,700 / $1,950 = $0.87. A CPI of less than 1 means that the
     project is performing over budget.

 94. B. When the schedule baseline is no longer achievable, the project manager must evaluate
     what corrective options exist to get the project back on track. This may include having
     to re-baseline the schedule so that targets are achievable; changes to a baseline, however,
     should go through a formal change request process.

 95. D. Data analysis is a tool and technique of the Control Costs process and determines
     variances in cost using earned value formulas.

 96. A. The Validate Scope process is concerned with acceptance of work results, while the
     Control Quality process is concerned with the correctness of the work.

 97. C. An iteration burndown chart is a data analysis tool and technique of the Control
     Schedule process. This chart is used to track the remaining work to be completed against
     the backlog.

 98. D. The EAC formula for this question is AC + [(BAC - EV) / (CPI x SPI)]. First, calculate
     CPI, which is EV / AC: therefore, $145 / $148 = .$98. SPI is EV / PV; therefore,
     $145 / $162 = .$90. Plugging in the numbers from the question, you get
     $148 + [($200 - $145) / (.$98 x .$90)] = $210.

 99. C. Reserve analysis is a data analysis technique of the Monitor Risks process. Reserve
     analysis compares the amount of contingency reserve remaining to address the risk that
     remains. Contingency reserves (used to deal with known risks) are considered part of the
     project budget, while management reserves (used to deal with unknown risks) are not.

100. D. The EAC forecast for ETC work considering both SPI and CPI factors assumes two
     things: there is a negative cost performance to date, and the project schedule dates must
     be met.

101. B. The purpose of the Control Quality process is to monitor and record the results of
     executing the quality management activities to assess performance and ensure outputs
     are complete, are correct, and meet expectations. According to the PMBOK (R) Guide, this
     process is also responsible for determining whether the project outputs do what they were
     intended to do.

102. C. The project manager is carrying out the Perform Integrated Change Control process.
     This process involves reviewing and generating a decision on change requests submitted,
     including evaluating the impact of the changes and what options exist. Change requests
     should be vetted through a formal change control process.
                            Chapter 4: Monitoring and Controlling (Domain 4.0)                  285



103. B. CPI = EV / AC, or in this example, $2,100 / $2,000 = $1.05. SPI = EV / PV, or in this
     example, $2,100 / $2,200 = $.95.

104. C. To calculate SPI, use the following formula: SPI = EV / PV. Plug in the values to
     calculate the following: $1,700 / $2,000 = $0.85. An SPI of less than 1 means that the
     project is performing behind schedule.

105. C. Inspection is a tool and technique of the Control Quality process, and it examines
     the work to determine whether it conforms to standards that have been documented.
     According to the PMBOK(R) Guide, inspections may occur at any given level of the project,
     including at the activity level.

106. D. Work performance information is an input of the Monitor and Control Project
     Work process. Work performance reports are an input of the processes mentioned in the
     question. Work performance data is an input of several processes in the Monitoring and
     Controlling process group.

107. A. A negative cost variance means that the project is over its planned costs, not under.

108. B. Data analysis is the only tool and technique of the Control Scope process.

109. D. CV = EV - AC, so CV is $2,100 - $2,000 = $100. SV = EV - PV, so $2,100 - $2,200 = -$100.

110. B. Status review meetings occur throughout the Monitoring and Controlling phase
     of the project. The purpose of these meetings is to provide stakeholders with updated
     information on the progress of the project in a formal manner. Attendees may include a
     variety of predetermined stakeholders, such as the sponsor, project team members, users,
     or customers.

111. A. The project manager has asked Yazzy to calculate the to-complete performance index
     (TCPI). The formula for TCPI is as follows:
      TCPI = (BAC - EV) / (BAC - AC)
      Plug in the values to get the following: ($70,000 - $65,000) / ($70,000 - $60,000) = $0.50.
      A TCPI of less than 1 is easier to complete.

112. C. Control Quality is the process concerned with correctness of the work, whereas
     Validate Scope is the process concerned with acceptance of the work.

113. C. To calculate the project's performance using the information provided, you can use the
     cost performance index (CPI) earned value calculation. The formula for calculating CPI is
     CPI = EV / AC. Plug in the values to calculate the following: $5,000 / $7,500 = $0.67. A
     CPI of less than 1 means that the project is performing over budget.

114. D. The schedule variance (SV) and the schedule performance index (SPI) are two
     performance measurements that pertain to variances in schedule dates.

115. B. Risk audits can be used to evaluate the effectiveness of the risk management processes.
     The frequency and approach to carrying out risk audits is typically captured within the
     risk management plan.
286        Answers Appendix



116. A. Estimate at completion (EAC) calculates the expected cost of a work component,
     schedule activity, or the project at its completion. The most common formula for EAC is
     AC + bottom-up ETC. Options C and D are ETC formulas, not EAC formulas.

117. B. According to the PMBOK (R) Guide, the change log is a comprehensive list of changes
     submitted during the project and their current status. It captures corrective actions,
     preventive actions, or defect repair needed. The change log becomes a key document
     managed as part of the Perform Integrated Change Control process, where change
     requests are reviewed and a decision on the request is made.

118. C. Actual cost refers to the realized cost incurred for the work performed on an activity
     during a specific time period.

119. B. The quality management plan may describe measurements that fall within a specified
     range. These are called tolerable results.

120. C. Work performance reports are an output of the Monitor and Control Project Work
     process. These reports can take many forms and are intended to create awareness of
     issues, provide information to make decisions, and take action regarding the issues.

121. A. The Perform Integrated Change Control process is carried out as part of monitoring
     and controlling the activities, which occurs in conjunction with execution activities but is
     not itself considered part of the Executing process group.

122. D. Estimate at completion (EAC) is the expected cost of the work when completed.

123. C. The purpose of the Validate Scope process and Control Quality process are
     often confused with one another. Validate Scope is concerned with acceptance of the
     deliverables, while Control Quality is concerned with the correctness of deliverables and
     meeting agreed-upon quality requirements.

124. C. The formula for EAC is AC + bottom-up ETC. The question states you obtained
     the bottom-up ETC estimate from your team members. The formula looks like this:
     $650 + $75 = $725.

125. D. The project manager will need to measure scope completed against scope planned. To
     do this, they will need work performance data, a key input of the Control Scope process.
     Variance and trend analysis are tools and techniques of the process, not inputs.

126. B. When performing the Control Resources process, data analysis may be used to
     evaluate what alternatives exist to completing activities with resources, such as alternate
     resources. Data analysis also includes performing cost-benefit analysis, performance
     reviews, and trend analysis.

127. C. Variance analysis involves comparing the scope baseline against actual scope
     completed to determine whether variance is within the acceptable threshold amount; if
     not, corrective or preventive action may be needed.

128. D. The formula for TCPI when BAC is no longer attainable (or when using EAC) is as
     follows: (BAC - EV) / (EAC - AC). For this question, the formula is as follows:
     ($1,800 - $1,680) / ($1,820 - $1,700) = $1.0.
                            Chapter 4: Monitoring and Controlling (Domain 4.0)              287



129. C. Status review meetings are considered one of the most important types of meetings
     a project manager holds throughout the project. These types of meetings use interaction
     communication, where communication occurs between stakeholders and is live.

130. C. Common causes of variance that fall outside the acceptable range are difficult to
     correct and usually require reorganization of the process. Decisions to change the process
     are not within the project manager's authority and always require management approval.

131. D. Earned value management is a performance measurement method. Forecasting is not
     a performance measurement method. Variance analysis and trend analysis are types of
     performance review.

132. A. The sponsor is requesting the earned value of the project. Earned value represents the
     measure of work performed expressed in terms of the budget authorized for that work; in
     other words, it is the sum of the planned value of completed work.

133. D. To calculate estimate to complete (ETC) when the work is progressing as planned,
     use the following formula: ETC = EAC - AC. Notice that the question does not provide
     EAC or CPI (which is needed to calculate EAC) but does provide all the necessary values
     needed to perform the additional calculations. To get to the answer, you must first
     calculate CPI, then EAC, and finally ETC. The formula for calculating CPI is EV / AC,
     and the formula for calculating EAC when progressing as planned is BAC / CPI.
      CPI calculation: $10,000 / $12,000 = $0.83
      EAC calculation: $25,000 / $0.83 = $30,120.48
      ETC calculation: $30,120.48 - $12,000 = $18,120.49

134. B. Variance at completion is calculated this way: BAC - EAC.

135. A. A stakeholder assessment matrix allows you to compare planned engagement levels
     against actual engagement levels. This can be used in conjunction with the multicriteria
     decision analysis technique, where predefined criteria that are prioritized and weighted
     can be used to assess engagement levels.

136. B. The Control Procurements process involves monitoring vendor performance and
     coordinating among all vendors when there are multiple vendors involved on the project.

137. D. Check sheets are a type of data-gathering tool of the Control Quality process used
     to help organize data when performing inspections and togather information on defects.
     Checklists, statistical sampling, and questionnaires and surveys are other data-gathering
     tools and techniques of the process.

138. D. Workarounds are responses to unplanned risks and are used in the Monitor Risks
     process.

139. B. Planned value is the authorized budget assigned to the scheduled work; in other words,
     it refers to the value of the work planned to be completed.

140. C. The ETC formula for this question is (BAC - EV). Plugging in the numbers from the
     question, you get $200 - $145 = $55.
288        Answers Appendix



141. C. Data analysis is a tool and technique of multiple project management processes,
     including the Control Schedule process, where it encompasses the use of earned value
     analysis, iteration burndown charts, performance reviews, trend analysis, variance
     analysis, and what-if scenario analysis.

142. A. According to the PMBOK(R) Guide, there are three key dimensions that earned value
     management develops and monitors for each work package and control account: planned
     value, earned value, and actual cost.

143. C. Scatter diagrams examine and plot dependent and independent variables, such as
     planned and actual performance. They are also used to help look for and analyze root
     causes of problems.

144. B. Reserve analysis is a technique used as part of the Control Costs and Monitor Risks
     process. This technique involves the analysis of how much reserves have been consumed to
     date and whether sufficient reserves remain to address current and future risks.

145. D. Validate Scope and Control Scope belong to the Monitoring and Controlling process
     group. This process group has a total of 12 project management processes.

146. B. When the project is not expected to proceed as planned, calculate ETC by
     reestimating.

147. A. Risk audits are performed to examine the implementation of risk response plans
     and their effectiveness at dealing with risks and their root causes. Risk audits may also
     examine the risk management processes.

148. B. The Manage Communications process, not Monitor Communications, is responsible
     for the timely and appropriate collection, creation, distribution, and storage of project
     information. Monitor Communications, on the other hand, is responsible for ensuring
     that the information needs of the project and its stakeholders are met.

149. A. Risk responses are developed through the Plan Risk Responses process, which is
     iteratively carried out as new risks are identified and reassessed.

150. C. A CPI of greater than 1 is performing under budget; an SPI of less than 1 is performing
     behind schedule. Remember that generally an index > 1 is good, an index = 1 is perfect,
     an index of < 1 is bad.

151. A. Work performance data is an output of the Direct and Manage Project Work process.
     The information and results you gather in the Control Procurements process are collected
     as part of the Direct and Manage Project Work process.

152. B. To calculate SPI, use the following formula: SPI = EV / PV. Plug in the values to
     calculate the following: $4,000 / $3,500 = $1.14. An SPI of greater than 1 means that the
     project is performing ahead of schedule.

153. B. Formal acceptance of project deliverables occurs through the Validate Scope process.
     This process is performed periodically throughout the project's life, as major deliverables
     are completed.
                                                  Chapter 5: Closing (Domain 5.0)              289



154. C. The SV for this project is -25, which means the project is behind schedule. The CV
     for this project is 50, which means the costs are lower than what you had planned for this
     point in time.

155. A. The question is asking for an input that can be used to address the engagement level
     of stakeholders. The scenario involves the Monitor Stakeholder Engagement process.
     Interpersonal and team skills and decision-making are tools and techniques and therefore
     not the correct choices. Since the project management plan contains the stakeholder
     engagement plan, which documents the strategy for engagement stakeholders, this is the
     best option. Other useful components of the project management plan also include the
     communications management plan and resource management plan.

156. C. According to the PMBOK(R) Guide, inspections are sometimes called reviews, product
     reviews, and walk-throughs.

157. B. This question describes the Monitoring and Controlling process, not the Planning
     processes. Options C and D are tools and techniques from the Risk processes in the
     Planning process group. Data analysis consists of periodic, scheduled reviews of identified
     risks, risk responses, and risk priorities.

158. B. The process results in the following outputs: work performance information, change
     requests, and project management plan updates. In relation to this process, work
     performance information reflects the status of stakeholder engagement compared to
     planned engagement levels.

159. D. Data representation can include the use of a stakeholder engagement matrix to
     assess whether communication needs are being met. In this scenario, the Monitor
     Communications process is being carried out.

160. C. Seller invoices are part of the work performance reports input. They are processed
     using a payment system, but this is a tool and technique of the process, not an output.



Chapter 5: Closing (Domain 5.0)
  1. A. Addition is a type of project ending where the project itself evolves into ongoing
     operations, such as becoming its own ongoing business unit.

  2. C. Weak matrix organizational structures tend to experience the least amount of stress
     during the project closeout processes.

  3. B. The Close Project or Phase process has the following outputs: project documents
     updates; final product, service, or result transition; final report; and organizational
     process assets updates. Organizational process assets updates include archived project
     documents, operational and support documents, project or phase closure documents, and
     lessons learned repository.
290        Answers Appendix



  4. B. Closed procurements are an output of the Control Procurements process. The closed
     procurements output is where the buyer provides the seller with formal written notice that
     the contract has been completed.

  5. D. The Code of Ethics and Professional Conduct is published by PMI, and all PMP
     credential holders are expected to adhere to its standards.

  6. B. The Close Project or Phase process is responsible for finalizing all activities for the
     project, phase, or contract. Some of the key activities are included in this process are as
     follows: actions necessary to satisfy completion or exit criteria of the project; activities
     related to completion of contractual agreements; activities necessary to transfer the
     project's products, services, or results to operation; archiving documentation and lessons
     learned; and measuring stakeholder satisfaction.

  7. B. In this instance, Joe is correct. When resources are cut off from the project or are
     no longer provided to the project, it's starved prior to completing all requirements.
     Integration, on the other hand, is when resources of the project are distributed to other
     areas in the organization or are assigned to other projects.

  8. A. According to the Code of Ethics and Professional Conduct, project management
     practitioners should adhere to the following four values: responsibility, respect, fairness,
     and honesty.

  9. C. Respect involves behaving in a professional manner. While project managers are
     not responsible for the actions of others, they are responsible for their own actions and
     reactions. Part of acting professionally involves controlling one's self and reactions in
     questionable situations, as David did in this scenario.

 10. A. According to the Agile Practice Guide, predictive life cycles take advantage of things
     that are known and proven as a way of reducing the level of uncertainty and complexity.

 11. C. Project resources are released according to the resource management plan. Generally
     speaking, resources are released at the conclusion of the project since team members
     typically participate in a final lessons-learned meeting.

 12. D. Risk is lowest during the Closing process because you've completed the work of the
     project at this point.

 13. D. Honesty involves not only information regarding your own background and
     experience but information regarding the project circumstances as well. Although it may
     set the project back by one month, being truthful is considered part of your responsibility
     as a project manager honoring the code of conduct.

 14. B. Honesty can include a lot of topics: reporting the truth regarding project status, being
     honest about your own experience, not deceiving others, not making false statements, and
     so on. As a project manager, you are responsible for truthfully reporting all information
     in your possession to stakeholders, customers, the project sponsor, and the public when
     required.
                                                   Chapter 5: Closing (Domain 5.0)              291



15. C. The best answer in this situation is to get the facts before taking any action. A
    violation based only on suspicion should not be reported. You can get the facts by telling
    your friend you're concerned about the appearance of impropriety and ask her whether
    the vendor gave her these items. It could be that these are the first of several samples
    that will be coming from all the vendors bidding on the project so the equipment can
    be evaluated in light of the project objectives. Or she could have accepted them as gifts,
    which is not appropriate. Never jump to conclusions. Always ask and get the facts straight
    before reporting a conflict-of-interest situation.

16. A. Responsibility is the act of making decisions that are for the good of the organization
    rather than ourselves, admitting your mistakes, being responsible for the decisions you
    make (or those you don't make), and the consequences that result, along with other
    actions.

17. B. The Close Project or Phase process is part of the Project Integration Management
    Knowledge Area, not Scope Management. It is the only process belonging to the Closing
    process group.

18. D. The Project Integration Management Knowledge Area contains the Close Project
    or Phase process. This is the only process within the Closing process group, and it is
    responsible for all activities associated with administrative closure of a project, contract,
    or phase.

19. A. According to the Agile Practice Guide, the servant leadership approach contains the
    following characteristics: promoting self-awareness; listening; serving those on the team;
    helping people grow; coaching versus controlling; promoting safety, respect, and trust;
    and promoting the energy and intelligence of others.

20. D. Giving another individual an opportunity to be honest is appropriate; if they are not
    honest, it is your responsibility to report the truth.

21. D. You should always honestly report your qualifications, your experience, and your past
    performance of services to potential employers, customers, PMI, and others. You should
    not knowingly accept assignments that are beyond your capabilities or experience.

22. B. When people work in unfamiliar environments, culture shock can occur. Training and
    researching information about the country you'll be working in can help counteract this.

23. C. Honesty involves not only information regarding your own background and
    experience but information regarding the project circumstances as well.

24. C. A project whose resources have been cut off or are no longer provided to the project
    (including human resources, equipment, supplies, or money) ends as a result of starvation.
    Examples of what leads to starvation include the following: other projects taking
    precedence, a customer curtailing an order, a project budget being reduced, or a key
    resource quitting.

25. C. A predictive life cycle contains fixed requirements that produce a single delivery
    with activities performed once for the entire project. A goal of predictive life cycles is to
    manage costs.
292        Answers Appendix



 26. D. Measuring customer satisfaction is just one of the many activities that occur during
     administrative closure of a project. While some projects check in and measure satisfaction
     at key points throughout the project's life cycle, it should occur during project closure at a
     minimum.

 27. A. The most appropriate response is to inform the foreign officials and conduct an
     investigation to look into the matter. This ensures your integrity and the integrity of the
     company and adheres to truthful reporting standards as required in the Code of Ethics
     and Professional Conduct.

 28. C. You know that your friend has reported his status untruthfully, and you are obligated
     to ensure that the truth is reported at all times. Giving your friend an opportunity to
     correct their behavior is appropriate; should they not be truthful, it is your responsibility
     to report status based on accurate information provided.

 29. B. According to the Agile Practice Guide, all project life cycles share the element of
     planning. What differs across predictive, iterative, incremental, and Agile life cycles is the
     degree to which planning is done, and when.

 30. C. The final report provides a detailed and documented summary of the project's
     performance. This document is produced as an output of the Close Project or Phase
     process. The final report is typically written by the project manager and includes
     information on scope, cost, schedule, risk, and quality outcomes, as well as other
     performance-based information.

 31. C. As part of upholding the value of responsibility and ensuring integrity, project
     managers are required to follow all applicable laws and regulations that apply to the
     industry, organization, or project. Bypassing customs is an example of violating a
     country's laws.

 32. A. Product verification ensures that the contract work is accurate and satisfactorily meets
     the requirements of the contract.

 33. B. Fairness includes avoiding favoritism and discrimination against others, avoiding
     and reporting conflict-of-interest situations, and maintaining impartiality in a decision-
     making process.

 34. D. The most appropriate response is to tell the customer about the remaining tasks and
     work with them to modify the schedule date or modify the agreement regarding the
     payment date.

 35. A. Project managers must constantly balance and manage the triple constraints of time,
     cost, and scope. Because of the nature of the constraints, one of these is the primary
     driver, and one is the least. Quality, risk, and resources are additional constraints that
     tend to compete with one another.

 36. A. In an iterative life cycle, activities are repeated until they are correct. In an incremental
     life cycle, activities are performed once for a given increment.

 37. D. A major goal of the incremental project life cycle is speed.
                                                 Chapter 5: Closing (Domain 5.0)              293



38. A. When you hold the PMP certification, one of the responsibilities that falls into this
    category is your responsibility to report violations of the PMP code of conduct. In some
    cases, we make poor judgments that can be corrected. To maintain the integrity of the
    profession, everyone who holds the PMP certification must adhere to the code of conduct
    that makes all of us accountable to each other.

39. B. According to the PMBOK(R) Guide, regression analysis is a technique that can be used
    as part of performing project or phase closure activities to improve project performance.
    This technique can be used to analyze interrelationships between different project
    variables that contributed to the project outcomes.

40. B. The project team is performing administrative closure activities associated with the
    Close Project or Phase process. While information captured will be added to the lessons
    learned register, administrative closure is a broader choice that captures additional
    activities noted in the question, such as archiving information and creating the final
    report.

41. B. When resources are cut off from the project and the project is starved prior to
    completing all requirements, it often leads to an unfinished project. Resources in this case
    can be money (such as in Yasmin's case), human resources, equipment, or supplies. This
    type of project ending is referred to as starvation.

42. A. The closed procurements output, which is a result of the Control Procurements
    process, encompasses formal written notice to the seller that the contract is complete.

43. A. While the project manager facilitates many of the activities that occur during
    project closure, all relevant stakeholders should be engaged in the process. This includes
    participating in lessons learned meetings.

44. B. All projects do eventually come to an end--whether they are successfully completed,
    cancelled, or evolve into operations. For this reason, project closure activities should
    always be carried out.

45. D. Diversity training is the best way to ensure that team members will learn to recognize
    and deal with cultural differences among the members because clashes could impede
    the project's progress. Team-building exercises are not a bad idea, but this question is
    specifically asking about cultural differences, which are best handled with diversity
    training.

46. D. One of the aspects of honesty includes your truthfulness about your PMP application
    and certification, your qualifications, and the continuing reports you provide to PMI to
    maintain your certification.

47. D. Upholding confidentiality agreements is part of the responsibility value. Protecting
    proprietary or confidential information that has been entrusted to you is part of a project
    manager's responsibility.

48. A. Stakeholders have the greatest influence during the early stages of the project. As work
    is completed and the project nears closure, the level of influence that stakeholders have
    drops, and they are less likely to receive approval for scope changes.
294        Answers Appendix



 49. C. Waterfall is a methodology that follows a predictive life cycle. While there are many
     Agile and Lean frameworks, the Agile Practice Guide addresses the following: Scrum,
     Extreme Programming, Kanban Method, Crystal Methods, Scrumban, Feature-Driven
     Development, Dynamic Systems Development Method, and Agile Unified Process.

 50. C. While a case can be made that all of the options presented are valid answers,
     incorrectly reporting credentials is an example of an ethics violation. As a credential
     holder, it is your responsibility to report violations of the PMP code of conduct.

 51. B. According to the Agile Practice Guide, there are three common roles used in Agile
     projects: cross-functional team member, product owner, and team facilitator. Many Agile
     frameworks and approaches do not address the role of project manager.

 52. B. Extinction occurs when the project is completed and the stakeholders have signed off
     on the project.

 53. A. The Close Project or Phase process is performed once or at predefined points in the
     project, such as the end of a phase.

 54. C. Changes should pass through a formal change control process. At this late stage of the
     project's life cycle, stakeholders have the least amount of influence, and there is a lower
     risk that significant changes to the scope will be approved.

 55. D. According to the Agile Practice Guide, servant leadership is the practice of leading
     through service to the team by focusing on developing team members and understanding
     and addressing their needs to generate the greatest possible performance.

 56. A. Part of the Code of Ethics and Professional Conduct requires that you cooperate in
     any investigation concerning ethics violations and in collecting information related to the
     violation.

 57. B. Closure activities should be performed for all projects, regardless of whether they end
     prematurely (such as a project that is cancelled or evolves into operations). This means
     that project work should not cease immediately upon ending prematurely, since closure
     activities must still be completed.

 58. D. Working in a foreign country can bring about an experience called culture shock.
     When you've spent years acting certain ways and expecting normal, everyday events to
     follow a specific course of action, you might find yourself disoriented when things don't
     go as you expected. In this scenario, the project manager was attempting to prevent
     culture shock.

 59. A. Addition is a project ending where a project evolves into ongoing operations. In these
     cases, a full-time staff can be required to support ongoing operations, maintenance, and
     monitoring of a project's deliverable.

 60. A. When a project ends as a result of resources being distributed to other areas in the
     organization or reassigned to other projects, it is referred to as integration. Starvation,
     on the other hand, is when a project ends as a result of resources being cut off from the
     project.
                                                  Chapter 5: Closing (Domain 5.0)             295



61. B. Given that the project manager contributed to the handbook while under assignment
    by the contracting organization and was just one of multiple contributors, it is likely that
    his actions would be viewed as a violation of the organization's policies on intellectual
    property. This would be verified by reviewing the project manager's contractual
    agreement.

62. D. The Close Project or Phase process should always be performed even if you are closing
    out a procurement. Contract closure occurs through both the Control Procurements and
    Close Project or Phase processes.

63. C. The project charter is an input of the Close Project or Phase process, which is used
    to reference project success criteria, approval requirements, and who will sign off on the
    project.

64. D. Project costs are lowest during the final stages of the project, during the Closing
    process group. Project spending should come to an end as the project closes.

65. B. Rather than asking how the team can act in a predictable manner, a team looking
    to adopt an Agile mind-set may instead ask how the team can act in a more Agile or
    transparent manner.

66. B. In a project-oriented organization, the project team is dedicated to the project. When a
    project is complete, they either transition to another project or are released.

67. C. Respect involves several areas, including the way we conduct ourselves, the way we
    treat others, listening to other viewpoints, and conducting ourselves in a professional
    manner. According to the Code of Ethics and Professional Conduct, an environment of
    respect generates trust and confidence and fosters mutual cooperation.

68. D. The Closing process group is the most often skipped process group in project
    management. According to the PMBOK(R) Guide, the Closing process should be performed
    in all instances of a project coming to an end--including if the project is cancelled or ends
    prematurely.

69. B. Respect is our duty to show a high regard for ourselves, others, and the resources
    entrusted to us. This includes fostering an environment where people's differences and
    diverse perspectives are encouraged and valued.

70. C. Honesty entails acting in a truthful manner in both our communications and conduct.
    Although the project manager's intentions seemed to result from positive intentions,
    the act of forging survey responses--even if he felt that they reflected truthful feedback
    received--does not represent truthful actions.

71. B. Teams working in a weak matrix organization tend to experience the least amount of
    stress during the Closing processes. This is because, in a weak matrix organization, the
    functional manager assigns all tasks (project-related tasks as well) so the team members
    have a job to return to once the project is completed and there's no change in reporting
    structure.
296        Answers Appendix



 72. C. The administrative closure procedures include documenting and gathering lessons
     learned, indexing records and archiving them, analyzing the project success or failure, and
     archiving financial information. Documenting the final results of the contract occurs in
     the Control Procurement process.

 73. B. The project sponsor is looking for the final report, which is a document produced out
     of the Close Project or Phase process that summarizes the project's overall performance.
     In addition to performance-related data, it also summarizes whether the objectives and
     business needs outlined in the business plan were met.

 74. B. The final report is produced out of the Close Project or Phase process. It includes a
     summary of the project performance, such as a summary-level description of the phase
     or overall project; a summary of the scope, quality, cost, and schedule performance and
     variances; and a summary of risks or issues encountered.

 75. A. A role delineation study (RDS) can best be described as a job analysis. PMI conducts a
     role delineation study every five to seven years for every discipline it credentials. An RDS
     is conducted by bringing together volunteers to discuss the specific roles associated with
     each certification to identify the tasks and responsibilities that the roles will be expected
     to perform.

 76. C. Project communications is an input of the Close Project or Phase process as part of
     project documents. It includes all communications that have been generated throughout
     the project.

 77. C. Sometimes you might find yourself working with teams of people from different
     countries or cultures. Some team members might be from one country and some from
     another. The best way to ensure that cultural or ethical differences do not hinder your
     project is to provide training for all team members.

 78. C. The Close Project or Phase process is responsible for administrative closure, as well as
     ensuring that ongoing work--such as maintenance, operations, and ongoing support--is
     handed over to a different group or organization responsible for performing the activities.

 79. B. Hybrid life cycles combine elements of different life cycles to achieve a certain goal. A
     hybrid approach may contain a combination of iterative, predictive, incremental, and/or
     Agile approaches.

 80. A. Activities associated with transferring ongoing activities into operations occurs as
     part of the Close Project or Phase process, which belongs to the Project Integration
     Management Knowledge Area.

 81. C. According to the Code of Ethics and Professional Conduct, respect is our duty to
     show a high regard for ourselves, others, and the resources entrusted to us.

 82. D. A project can come to an end for several reasons, including the following: it is
     completed successfully, it is cancelled or killed prior to completion, it evolves into ongoing
     operations, and it no longer exists as a project. Acceptance and approval of deliverables
     alone is not indicative of a project ending.
                                                   Chapter 5: Closing (Domain 5.0)                297



83. B. The team has completed activities that generated the final product, service, or result
    transition process output. This output is generated out of the Close Project or Phase
    process.

84. D. This question refers to the Control Procurements process, where procurements
    are closed (formal notice is one of the outputs of this process in the form of closed
    procurements). Note that this process belongs to the Monitoring and Controlling process
    group and that administrative closure of procurements occurs through the Close Project
    or Phase process.

85. B. All of us see the world through our own experiences. Your experiences are not
    someone else's experiences; therefore, what you perceive about a situation might be
    very different from what others believe. Respect involves fostering an environment that
    engenders trust and confidence.

86. D. The milestone list contains the final dates that the project milestones have been
    accomplished. This is used as an input to the Close Project or Phase process, which is
    where the final report is produced.

87. A. The business case, not the final report, provides a written justification for the project.
    The final report, on the other hand, provides a summary of the project performance,
    including a summary of work completed against the plan, along with a summary of issues
    and risks encountered.

88. C. While lessons learned are collected throughout the project's life cycle and added to
    the lessons learned register, it is through the Close Project or Phase process that a final
    lessons-learned meeting occurs, and project documents are archived for use on future
    projects.

89. B. Since the scenario outlined that the final deliverable of the project was completed,
    it implies that closing activities would follow. Administrative closure, which occurs as
    part of the Close Project or Phase process, consists of activities such as ensuring that exit
    criteria have been met and contractual agreements were properly closed out, measuring
    stakeholder satisfaction, and ensuring that ongoing operational or sustainment activities
    are transferred to operations.

90. D. As part of closing out a project, ongoing activities (such as support and maintenance)
    are transitioned to the appropriate teams. When this does not occur, project resources
    cannot be fully released from these activities.

91. C. In iterative and incremental project life cycles, feedback helps to better plan the next
    part of the project. In Agile projects, incremental delivery exposes requirements that are
    hidden or misunderstood.

92. B. There are four formal types of project endings: addition, starvation, integration,
    and extinction. Crashing typically refers to the schedule compression technique where
    additional resources are added to an activity in order to complete it more quickly.
298        Answers Appendix



 93. C. As part of our responsibility as project management practitioners, we should report
     unethical or illegal conduct to appropriate individuals or management. Ensuring that
     confidentiality, regulations, and legal requirements are followed is part of upholding the
     responsibility value.

 94. A. Project risk is highest during the beginning of the project life cycle, when less is known
     about the project. As the project progresses, project risk decreases and is lowest during the
     final stages of the project's life cycle.

 95. A. A predictive life cycle, also referred to as plan-driven or Waterfall, is where the
     majority of planning occurs during the beginning stages of the project, followed by
     execution, in a more sequential process.

 96. C. Working in a foreign country can bring about an experience called culture shock.
     When you've spent years acting certain ways and expecting normal, everyday events to
     follow a specific course of action, you might find yourself disoriented when things don't
     go as you expected.

 97. B. An incremental life cycle focuses on speed as a goal. It generates smaller, finished
     deliverables to get a solution to a customer more quickly. An incremental life cycle has
     dynamic requirements.

 98. C. Extinction is the best type of project ending, meaning that the project came to an end
     because it was completed and accepted by the stakeholders.

 99. B. Close Project or Phase is part of the Project Integration Management Knowledge Area.

100. D. The Closing process group consists of a single project management process: Close
     Project or Phase.

101. C. The Validate Scope process is responsible for confirming that scope has been
     achieved and receiving sign-off and acceptance from the relevant stakeholders. Accepted
     deliverables then becomes an input to the Close Project or Phase process.

102. A. Responsibility is the act of making decisions that are for the good of the organization
     rather than ourselves, admitting our mistakes, being responsible for the decisions we make
     (or those we don't make), and the consequences that result, along with other actions.

103. B. The PMBOK(R) Guide addresses four project life cycles: predictive, iterative,
     incremental, and Agile.

104. B. The Code of Ethics and Professional Conduct addresses core values that project
     management practitioners should and must uphold. Specifically, it applies to all PMI
     members, PMI volunteers, those certified through PMI, and those going through the PMI
     certification process.

105. C. Integration occurs when the resources of the project are distributed to other areas in
     the organization or are assigned to other projects. In this case, the functional manager is
     reassigning resources to another project.
                                                   Chapter 5: Closing (Domain 5.0)             299



106. A. As the project progresses, project costs begin to taper off. The project is currently in
     the closing stage, and risk of overspending should be minimal at this point.

107. A. The procurement manager's behavior can be viewed as a conflict of interest. A conflict
     of interest is when you put your personal interests above the interests of the project or
     when you use your influence to cause others to make decisions in your favor without
     regard for the project outcome. In other words, your personal interests take precedence
     over your professional obligations, and you make decisions that allow you to personally
     benefit regardless of the outcome of the project.

108. B. The project management plan contains the resource management plan, which
     addresses how resources will be obtained, managed, and released.

109. A. Procurement documentation includes the contract, supporting documents such as the
     WBS and project schedule and so on, and any technical documents created by the vendor
     during the project.

110. C. An Agile life cycle consists of a blend of iterative and incremental approaches, which
     focuses on refining the work to deliver outcomes more frequently. An Agile life cycle has
     dynamic requirements that focus on customer value.

111. D. While most (if not all!) project managers hope that all project team members are
     held accountable to the core values identified within the Code of Ethics and Professional
     Conduct, it is written with project management practitioners in mind. This includes the
     following individuals: all PMI members, those who hold a PMI certification, those who
     begin the PMI certification process, and those who volunteer through PMI.

112. D. The procurement manager's behavior can be viewed as a conflict of interest. A conflict
     of interest is when you put your personal interests above the interests of the project or
     when you use your influence to cause others to make decisions in your favor without
     regard for the project outcome.

113. B. The lessons learned register is the document in which the project manager and team
     capture lessons learned and knowledge throughout the project's life. At the end of the
     project, lessons learned are archived with the rest of the documentation, and lessons
     learned are added to a lessons learned repository for use on future projects.

114. B. Projects that evolve into ongoing operations are considered projects that end because
     of addition. In this case, supporting the enterprise resource planning system evolved into
     its own business unit with a full-time staff. In cases such as this, systems can develop
     into their own organization with full-time staff responsible for its ongoing operations,
     maintenance, and monitoring of software.

115. B. Incremental life cycles focus on speed of delivery as an optimization method. In this
     type of life cycle, the project yields frequent smaller deliverables to avoid waiting for
     everything to be completed before a solution exists. In other words, a subset of the overall
     solution becomes available sooner.

116. D. Responsibility includes accepting assignments that you are qualified to take on.
     You should always honestly report your qualifications, your experience, and your past
     performance of services to potential employers, customers, PMI, and others.
300        Answers Appendix



117. D. During Closing, a project has the highest probability of completing successfully.

118. B. Conflicts of interest might include your associations or affiliations. If you sit on the
     decision committee and don't tell anyone about your association with the winning bidder,
     that is clearly a conflict of interest. The correct thing to do in this case would be to, first,
     inform the project sponsor and the decision committee of your affiliation; the committee
     and sponsor may simply ask that you remove yourself from being part of the selection
     process.

119. B. Close Project or Phase is the only process within the Closing process group. Other
     closure activities related to procurements occur as part of Monitoring and Controlling,
     through the Control Procurements process.

120. D. The Closing process group contains the activities necessary to formally complete
     or close the project, phase, or contract. This process group consists of a single project
     management process: Close Project or Phase.

121. D. When resources are cut off from the project or are no longer provided to the project,
     it's starved prior to completing all the requirements.

122. B. Fairness includes avoiding favoritism and discrimination against others, avoiding and
     reporting conflict of interest situations, and maintaining impartiality in a decision-making
     process. According to the Code of Ethics and Professional Conduct, fairness is our duty
     to understand the truth and act in a truthful manner, both in our communications and in
     our conduct.

123. A. While finalizing open claims is considered to be an activity that relates to
     administrative closure of procurements, addressing contested changes to a contract is an
     activity that occurs as part of controlling procurements. This activity instead occurs as
     part of the Control Procurement process, not the Close Project or Phase process.

124. D. Responsibility is the act of making decisions that are for the good of the organization
     rather than ourselves, admitting our mistakes, being responsible for the decisions we make
     (or those we don't make), and the consequences that result, along with other actions. It
     represents one of four values that project management practitioners should uphold.

125. A. In a weak matrix organization, the functional manager has greater authority than the
     project manager. Based only on the information provided within the question, it is likely
     that resources will be reassigned to another project.

126. C. This project ended due to starvation because the grant money was not renewed.

127. C. When closing out a project, the project manager should review the project
     management plan to ensure that all of the project work has been completed successfully
     and that the objectives outlined in the plan have been met.

128. D. Cheryl and the project manager are engaged in capturing lessons learned in engaging
     with this particular vendor and also in activities associated with managing the vendor's
     performance; this includes discussing what went well and what could have been done
     differently, which will benefit future projects.
                                                   Chapter 5: Closing (Domain 5.0)               301



129. C. The project manager typically writes the final report. The project's final report
     contains a summary of what occurred on the project and may include information on
     scope, cost, schedule, risk, and quality outcomes.

130. A. Don't accept gifts that might be construed as conflicts of interest. If your organization
     does not have a policy regarding vendor gifts, set limits for yourself depending on
     the situation, the history of gift acceptance by the organization in the past, and the
     complexity of the project. It's always better to decline a gift you're unsure about than to
     accept it and later lose your credibility, your reputation, or your PMP status because of
     bad judgment.

131. D. Honesty can include a lot of topics: reporting the truth regarding project status, being
     honest about your own experience, not deceiving others, not making false statements, and
     so on. According to the Code of Ethics and Professional Conduct, honesty is your duty to
     understand the truth and act in a truthful manner, both in your communications and in
     your conduct.

132. D. An iterative approach focuses on obtaining feedback for unfinished work early as a
     way of improving the results in iterations. Iterative life cycles have dynamic requirements
     and focus on the correctness of the solution.

133. B. Lessons learned are not used to document employee performance but rather to note
     the successes and failures that occur during a project, including information such as the
     reasons why certain corrective actions were put into place, the causes of performance
     variances, and so on. If employees think negative information in the lessons learned file
     will be used against them, they won't be honest in reporting lessons learned, and you'll
     miss out on the benefit of learning from past mistakes.

134. B. Marketplace conditions and financial management and accounts payable systems are
     examples of enterprise environmental factors versus organizational process assets. When
     performing the Close Project or Phase process, project or phase closure guidelines or
     requirements, along with the configuration management knowledge base, serve as valuable
     inputs. The configuration management knowledge base contains versions and baselines of
     standards, policies, procedures, and project documents belonging to the organization.

135. A. The tools and techniques of the Close Project or Phase process are as follows: expert
     judgment, data analysis (document analysis, regression analysis, trend analysis, variance
     analysis), and meetings.

136. A. Responsibility entails ensuring integrity, accepting assignments we are qualified for,
     abiding by laws and regulations, and maintaining confidential information.

137. C. Cheryl and the project manager are engaged in carrying out the Close Project or
     Phase process, which includes administrative closure activities for procurements. In
     this particular instance, they are engaged in capturing lessons learned for use on future
     projects.

138. D. Respect, not fairness, is the value that addresses culture shock and diversity training.
     Accepting vendor gifts is acceptable when the gift or situation complies with a company's
     stated policies.
302        Answers Appendix



139. A. The project manager has just carried out the Validate Scope process, which generates
     accepted deliverables. Accepted deliverables then pass through the Close Project or Phase
     process as an input.

140. A. Lessons learned is not a process--it's incorporated as an output of several processes.

141. A. The Project Integration Management Knowledge Area contains the following seven
     project management processes: Develop Project Charter, Develop Project Management
     Plan, Direct and Manage Project Work, Manage Project Knowledge, Monitor and Control
     Project Work, Perform Integrated Change Control, and Close Project or Phase.

142. B. The Tuckman ladder, also referred to as stages of team development, consists of
     five stages that teams may go through: forming, storming, norming, performing, and
     adjourning. In the adjourning stage, teams complete the work and are released.

143. D. Iterative life cycles use successive prototypes or proofs of concept to improve the
     product or result. Activities are repeated in cycles to produce new information and team
     insights.

144. D. Basis of estimates can be used to evaluate estimation of costs, resources, and activity
     durations against the actual results of the project. This can in turn feed valuable
     information to the lessons learned repository for future use. Basis of estimates is part of
     the project documents input of the Close Project or Phase process.

145. B. As a project manager, you are responsible for truthfully reporting all information in
     your possession to stakeholders, customers, the project sponsor, and the public when
     required. Always be up front regarding the project's progress.

146. A. Organizational process assets contain policies, procedures, guidelines, processes,
     historical information, and templates belonging to the organization--just to name a few!
     This would include policies that exist on using a project closure survey.

147. D. The Code of Ethics and Professional Conduct discusses your responsibility to report
     to the stakeholders, customers, or others any actions or circumstances that could be
     construed as a conflict of interest. Conflicts of interest might include your associations or
     affiliations.

148. B. A conflict of interest is when you put your personal interests above the interests of the
     project or when you use your influence to cause others to make decisions in your favor
     without regard for the project outcome. Violating the procurement policy to improve the
     budget situation was not the appropriate action to take.

149. B. Honesty and truthful reporting are required of PMP credential holders. In this
     situation, you would inform the customer of everything you know regarding the problem
     and work to find alternative solutions.

150. B. A project that has ended as a result of extinction signifies that it has completed
     successfully, and a project no longer exists.
                                                    Chapter 5: Closing (Domain 5.0)              303



151. C. Fairness includes avoiding favoritism and discrimination against others, avoiding
     and reporting conflict-of-interest situations, and maintaining impartiality in a decision-
     making process. In this case, scope creep should be brought to the project team's attention
     and treated as an unapproved change. This would need to go through the formal change
     control process.

152. B. Integration is where the resources of a project have been reassigned or redeployed,
     leading to early closure of the project. The lack of resources in the case of integration
     leads to the inability to complete the project.

153. D. According to the PMBOK(R) Guide, when performing closure activities for
     procurements, the project manager should confirm that formal acceptance of the seller's
     work has been achieved, all open claims are finalized, records reflect the final result, and
     all procurement documentation is archived for future use.

154. B. Respect includes the way you conduct yourself, the way you treat others, listening to
     other viewpoints, conducting yourself in a professional manner, and so on. This includes
     acting in a professional manner.

155. C. Predictive life cycles have fixed requirements that yield a single delivery. A great deal
     of planning occurs during the early stages of the project, and plans are detailed so that the
     team knows what to deliver and how. Changes are minimized in this type of life cycle.

156. B. Honesty involves not only information regarding your own background and experience
     but information regarding the project circumstances as well. This includes being up front
     and truthful about the project's status and information.

157. A. The best response is to decline the offer. This is a conflict of interest, and accepting the
     offer puts your own integrity and the contract award process in jeopardy.

158. A. When projects begin, risk is at its peak since there are many unknowns during the
     early stages of a project. As the project moves forward and more is known, risk decreases
     and is at its lowest during the final stages when closing activities occur.

159. A. The Control Procurement process is where procurements are closed. This includes
     providing the seller with formal written notice that the contract has been completed.
     Administrative closure of procurements, on the other hand, occurs through the Close
     Project or Phase process.

160. C. The key function of the Closing processes is to complete all the activities associated
     with closing out the project management processes to close out the project or phase. You
     will review the scope baseline and other documents in this process group, but it is not the
     key activity associated with the Close Project or Phase process.
304        Answers Appendix




Chapter 6: Full-Length Practice Exam
  1. B. Joseph Juran is behind "fitness for use," which means that the stakeholders' and
     customers' expectations are met or exceeded, thereby reflecting their view of quality.

  2. A. The business case captures the business need that the project is expected to satisfy,
     along with other key information and analysis, such as a cost-benefit analysis, as well as
     recommendations on how to solve a problem statement.

  3. B. The project manager is carrying out the Direct and Manage Project Work process.
     This process has three tools and techniques: expert judgment, project management
     information system, and meetings.

  4. C. The formula for calculating schedule variance is as follows: SV = EV - PV. Plug in the
     values to result in the following: $2,500 - $2,300 = $200. A positive schedule variance
     means that the project is ahead of schedule.

  5. C. The question refers to a key input of the Direct and Manage Project Work process,
     which provides overall management of the project work and deliverables. While several
     inputs are important, without the approved change requests, you cannot complete the
     activities referenced in the question.

  6. C. The purpose of the Monitor Risks process is to evaluate the effectiveness of risk
     processes, monitor the implementation of risk responses, track identified risks, and
     identify and analyze new risks. The question describes the technical performance analysis
     technique, which compares technical accomplishments achieved during execution to
     technical achievement planned.

  7. C. All of the options presented are valid data-gathering tools and techniques used
     to collect requirements. Only the focus groups option brings a group of stakeholders
     together to elicit their feedback, expectations, and general thoughts on a proposed topic
     or product. Focus groups are typically moderated by a trained facilitator or prequalified
     individual.

  8. C. To date, Sally and her team have carried out the Plan Procurement Management
     process. After publishing the RFP, the team is likely to review seller proposals submitted
     and select a vendor. This occurs through the Conduct Procurements process.

  9. C. According to the PMBOK(R) Guide, the key benefit of the Direct and Manage Project
     Work process is that it improves the probability of project success by providing overall
     management of the project work.

 10. D. The Lessons learned register is an output, not a tool and technique, of the Manage
     Project Knowledge process. Tools and techniques of the process include expert judgment,
     knowledge management, information management, and interpersonal and team skills.

 11. D. The resource management plan is where the processes and approach are documented
     for acquiring, managing, developing, and releasing project resources. This document is
     created out of the Plan Resource Management process and is a component of the project
                                             Chapter 6: Full-Length Practice Exam                    305



       management plan. While project management plan is an accurate choice, resource
       management plan is more specific and therefore the best choice among the options
       presented.

 12. C. Democratic, or participative, leaders gather all the facts and ask for input from the
     team before making a decision. In this style, all team members participate in the decision-
     making process.

 13. B. Project decisions now can impact the cost of quality in the form of returns, warranty
     claims, and recalls. Cost of quality includes costs incurred over the life of the product, not
     just those costs confined to a project.

 14. A. To calculate the critical path, you must first draw out the network diagram and then
     add the duration of each activity that falls within the individual network paths. Figure 6.1
     shows the network diagram and the three network paths that exist within it. The following
     is the duration of each of those paths: A-B-E-F-G = 18, A-C-F-G = 13, A-D-F-G = 16.

F i g u r e 6 .1    Network diagram critical path

                         Activity Name:     Activity Name:
                               B                  E
                          Duration: 6        Duration: 3




   Activity Name:        Activity Name:                         Activity Name:       Activity Name:
         A                     C                                      F                    G
    Duration: 2           Duration: 4                             Duration: 2          Duration: 5




                         Activity Name:
                               D
                          Duration: 7



 15. A. The Initiating process group is concerned with performing activities that define a new
     project or a new phase of an existing project. Mary Beth is in the process of carrying out
     the latter of the two.

 16. B. There are many types of power that an individual may use; relational power comes
     from participating in networking, or leveraging connections and alliances.

 17. B. When using the earned-value analysis technique, the performance measurement
     baseline is needed to compare against the actual results of the project.

 18. D. Parties that compromise or reconcile each give up something to reach a solution.
     Everyone involved decides what they will give on and what they won't give on, and
     eventually through all the give-and-take, a solution is reached.
306        Answers Appendix



 19. A. When evaluating projects using net present value (NPV), select projects with the
     highest NPV. The general rule is if the NPV calculation is greater than 0, accept the
     project. If the NPV calculation is less than 0, reject the project. In this case, you were
     asked to choose one project, making the first project the best choice.

 20. A. The formula for calculating estimate to complete (ETC) when assuming work is
     proceeding on plan is as follows: ETC = EAC - AC. Plug in the values provided to result in
     the following: $1,700 - $425 = $1,275.

 21. A. As resources are acquired and the team begins to execute the work of the project,
     team competencies and performance will need to be improved. This occurs through the
     Develop Team process, another process occurring as part of the Executing process group,
     which is where the Acquire Resources process belongs.

 22. D. The Achievement Theory, attributed to David McClelland, says that people are
     motivated by the need for three things: achievement, power, and affiliation. The need for
     affiliation comes from a team member wanting to have friendships with their co-workers
     and a sense of camaraderie with colleagues.

 23. B. A cost-reimbursable contract is where the buyer pays the seller for costs incurred for
     the work performed, plus a fee representing the seller profit. Because the full cost of the
     agreement is not known up front, the risk increases for the buyer.

 24. C. The Estimate Activity Resources process is where estimation of the type and quantity
     of resources occurs. Resources include people, material, equipment, and supplies. The
     process is part of the Project Resource Management Knowledge Area.

 25. A. The collaborate conflict resolution technique, also known as problem-solving, is where
     individuals go on a fact-finding mission to find the right solution to an existing problem.
     This is considered to be a win-win solution. The idea is that facts will yield a permanent
     solution.

 26. D. Prototypes allow project teams to collect feedback from stakeholders early on, which
     they can use to progressively elaborate on the scope and requirements. Prototypes are
     small-scale versions of the product and can include mock-ups or simulations.

 27. B. The purpose of the Develop Team process is to improve project performance through
     increased team competencies, better interactions among the team members, and
     improvements to the overall team environment. One of the key outputs of the process is
     team performance assessments.

 28. A. Failure costs are also known as cost of poor quality, and this question describes an
     internal failure cost.

 29. A. Integration occurs when the resources of the project--people, equipment, property,
     and supplies--are distributed to other areas in the organization or are assigned to other
     projects. This is typically a result of a strategic or prioritization change.

 30. D. The Control Resources process is responsible for ensuring that the physical resources
     assigned are available and utilized as planned and that any corrective action needed is
     taken. Physical resources refer to equipment, materials, facilities, and infrastructure
     resources.
                                            Chapter 6: Full-Length Practice Exam              307



31. C. The project manager and team have completed the project management plan. The next
    step would be to baseline the plan, which means to obtain formal documented approval
    of the plan. Changes after baseline must follow the documented change control process as
    defined within the plan.

32. A. Change requests may occur as a result of performing the Manage Stakeholder
    Engagement process. The purpose of this process is to cultivate appropriate engagement
    and interaction among stakeholders of the project. As a result of these activities, change
    requests to project or product scope may arise.

33. B. TCPI measures the degree of performance efficiency that must be maintained in order
    to complete the project on plan. A TCPI of 1 indicates that the team must maintain their
    efficiency; a TCPI of > 1 means that the team must increase their efficiency and that
    completing on plan will be more difficult; a TCPI of < 1 means that the team will have an
    easier time completing on plan.

34. D. The project manager is performing the Direct and Manage Project Work process. The
    deliverables produced as a result of performing the project work are the main output of
    this process. Other outputs include the work performance data, issue log, change requests,
    and updates made to the project management plan, project documents, and organizational
    process assets.

35. C. Agile release planning is used as a tool and technique of the Develop Schedule process,
    not Control Schedule. Tools and techniques of the Control Schedule process include the
    following: data analysis, critical path method, project management information system,
    resource optimization, leads and lags, and schedule compression.

36. D. The team has chosen to use the transfer risk response strategy. Transfer involves
    shifting the risk to a third party that will be responsible for covering the impact, should
    the risk occur. Insurance is an example of the transfer strategy.

37. C. Formal pre-assignments are typically documented within agreements or the project
    charter. In this case, we know that the marketing expert is internal to the organization,
    since she is a colleague of the project manager, making the project charter the best choice.

38. B. IRR is the discount rate when the present value of the cash inflows equals the original
    investment. When choosing between projects or when choosing alternative methods of
    doing the project, projects with higher IRR values are generally considered better than
    projects with low IRR values. This makes project B the best choice.

39. B. The Expectancy Theory, first proposed by Victor Vroom, says that the expectation of
    a positive outcome drives motivation. According to Vroom, people will behave in certain
    ways if they think there will be good rewards for doing so.

40. C. Flowcharts, logical data model, matrix diagrams, and mind mapping are all data
    representation tools, which is a tool and technique of the Plan Quality Management
    process.

41. A. The project scope statement contains the identified scope, including the product scope
    description, deliverables, acceptance criteria, and project exclusions. The project scope
    statement, once approved, becomes part of the scope baseline.
308                Answers Appendix



 42. B. The scope management plan is created through the Plan Scope Management process
     and captures the processes that will be used to identify scope, decompose scope (through
     the creation of a work breakdown structure), baseline scope, and then monitor and
     control it once work begins. After its creation, the scope management plan becomes a
     component of the project management plan.

 43. C. While any one of the administrative closure tasks listed may have been missed by
     Jill, it is clear that she did not finalize the transition of the project's end result to ongoing
     operations. This would have occurred through the implementation of ongoing support for
     the new system deployed.

 44. B. The Executing process group is concerned with carrying out the work required to
     generate deliverables; in other words, it involves executing the project management
     plan and any approved changes to it. The Monitoring and Controlling process group is
     responsible for tracking, reviewing, and regulating performance of the project.

 45. C. The Control Scope process ensures that no more and no less is completed than
     committed to as part of the approved scope baseline. Nicolas is likely to emphasize
     activities of this process to ensure that scope creep does not occur.

 46. A. Bidder conferences are meetings held by the buyer in order to ensure that prospective
     sellers have a common and clear understanding of the materials, solutions, or services
     that the buyer is looking to procure. It is meant to be a neutral and fair way of providing
     information to potential sellers.

 47. A. To calculate the early start of activity D, you would first need to perform a forward pass.
          Figure 6.2 shows the network diagram with early start and early finish dates calculated.

Figure 6.2                     Network diagram forward pass

                                     Early        Total      Early       Early         Total      Early
                                     Start: 3     Float:     Finish: 8   Start: 9      Float:     Finish: 11
                                                Activity Name:                       Activity Name:
                                                      B                                    E
                                     Late         Duration: Late         Late          Duration: Late
                                     Start:       6         Finish:      Start:        3         Finish:




 Early        Total      Early       Early        Total      Early       Early         Total      Early        Early     Total       Early
 Start: 1     Float:     Finish: 2   Start: 3     Float:     Finish: 6   Start: 12     Float:     Finish: 13   Start: 14 Float:      Finish: 18
            Activity Name:                      Activity Name:                       Activity Name:                     Activity Name:
                  A                                   C                                    F                                 G
 Late         Duration: Late         Late         Duration: Late         Late          Duration: Late          Late       Duration: Late
 Start:       2         Finish:      Start:       4         Finish:      Start:        2         Finish:       Start:     5         Finish:



                                     Early        Total      Early
                                     Start: 3     Float:     Finish: 9
                                                Activity Name:
                                                      D
                                     Late         Duration: Late
                                     Start:       7         Finish:
                                           Chapter 6: Full-Length Practice Exam                309



48. C. The Develop Project Charter process is responsible for developing a document that
    formally authorizes the existence of a project and provides the project manager with the
    authority to allocate resources to project activities.

49. C. Monte Carlo analysis is a type of simulation technique that calculates hundreds to
    thousands of possible scenarios that could occur against a project objective (such as
    achieving budget or completion date). It considers the combined effects of project risks
    and other variables to generate the likely outcomes. Because of the complexity of this
    simulation technique, it is performed using simulation software or similar tools.

50. C. Project life cycles can be predictive or adaptive. Within the project life cycle, the
    approach to developing the desired outcomes through one or more phases tends to follow
    a development life cycle. The development life cycle may follow characteristics of a
    predictive, iterative, incremental, adaptive, or hybrid model.

51. C. Fernando and the team are performing activities associated with the Executing process
    group. There are a total of 10 processes within this process group: Direct and Manage
    Project Work, Manage Project Knowledge, Manage Quality, Acquire Resources, Develop
    Team, Manage Team, Manage Communications, Implement Risk Responses, Conduct
    Procurements, and Manage Stakeholder Engagement.

52. D. The Monitoring and Controlling process group is where project performance is
    measured and analyzed to determine whether the project is staying true to the project
    management plan. This is where corrective and preventive actions are identified and vetted
    to ensure that the project remains on track.

53. C. To calculate CPI, use the following formula: CPI = EV / AC. To calculate SPI, use the
    following formula: SPI = EV / PV. Plug in the values to result in the following:
    CPI: $250 / $250 = $1.0
    SPI: $250 / $300 = $0.83

54. C. Good project managers know that best practices and standards must be tailored
    based on many variables in order to be effective. Examples of these variables include the
    environment, organizational culture, and stakeholder needs.

55. D. Frederick Herzberg came up with the Hygiene Theory, also known as the Motivation-
    Hygiene Theory. He postulates that two factors contribute to motivation: hygiene factors
    and motivators. Hygiene factors, such as pay, are not long-term motivators and instead
    prevent dissatisfaction (versus motivation). Motivators, on the other hand, deal with the
    substance of the work itself and the satisfaction one derives from performing the functions
    of the job.

56. B. All processes listed other than the Control Schedule process belong to the Executing
    process group. Based on the scenario provided, the team is focused on monitoring
    activities, indicating that the team is likely to perform a process associated with the
    Monitoring and Controlling process group.
310        Answers Appendix



 57. B. Administrative closure activities for procurements occur as part of the Close Project
     or Phase process. After receiving formal notice that the terms of a contract have been
     satisfied (which occurs through the Control Procurements process), a project manager
     would then move to perform administrative closure activities for the procurement. Other
     activities listed may also occur in parallel.

 58. D. Audits, or more specifically quality audits, are independent reviews performed by
     trained auditors or third-party reviewers. The purpose of a quality audit is to identify
     ineffective and inefficient activities or processes used on the project.

 59. A. According to the PMBOK(R) Guide, one of the benefits of the Monitor Stakeholder
     Engagement process is that it maintains or increases the efficiency and effectiveness of
     stakeholder engagement activities as the project and environment change.

 60. B. The project manager is likely to implement the approved changes. This occurs through
     the Direct and Manage Project Work process, which guides not only execution of the
     project management plan but also approved changes to the plan.

 61. B. Project communications refers to various documents and other communication-related
     artifacts such as performance reports, status updates and progress, and other relevant
     information required by stakeholders. While updates to the project management plan and
     other documents may occur as a result of the process, the key output generated is project
     communications.

 62. C. Resources are acquired through the Acquire Resources process, which belongs to the
     Executing process group.

 63. B. The lowest level of the WBS is the work package level. Work packages are decomposed
     into activities as part of the Define Activities process; activities are not considered to be
     part of the WBS.

 64. C. Agreements contain the terms and conditions of resources and services procured and
     should be the primary source of information about the procurement when it comes to
     what was agreed to in terms of delivery and requirements.

 65. A. Trend analysis is one of the techniques used to control the project schedule. Trend
     analysis involves analyzing project performance over a period of time in order to identify
     whether performance is improving or worsening.

 66. C. Colocation, also known as tight matrix, brings team members together in one physical
     location for the entire project or for important periods during the project life cycle.

 67. D. Joseph Juran developed the fitness for use theory that asks the following questions: Did
     the product satisfy a real need? Is the product safe? Did it meet the quality expectations?
     Crosby developed zero defects, Kaizen is concerned with continuous improvement, and
     Deming says quality is a management problem.

 68. B. Based on the scenario presented, the risk manager has carried out the Plan Risk
     Management, Identify Risks, and Perform Qualitative Risk Analysis processes. They are
     likely to carry out the Perform Quantitative Risk Analysis process next to analyze the
     combined effects of individual risks on overall project objectives.
                                            Chapter 6: Full-Length Practice Exam              311



69. C. Maslow's Hierarchy of Needs consists of the following, listed in order from the
    bottom to the top of the pyramid: basic physical needs, safety and security needs, social
    needs, self-esteem needs, and self-actualization.

70. A. The PMI Talent Triangle(R) addresses the following three key skill sets: technical project
    management, leadership, and strategic and business management.

71. D. To calculate EAC assuming a steady cost performance indicator (CPI), use the
    following formula: EAC = BAC / CPI. To calculate EAC for this scenario, you must first
    determine what the CPI is, since it is not provided. To calculate CPI, divide earned value
    by actual cost to result in the following: 600 / 550 = a CPI of 1.09. Plug the values into
    the EAC formula to result in the following:
    EAC: $1,000 / $1.09 = $917 (rounded to the nearest whole number)

72. D. Julie is placing emphasis on activities that are important to managing communications
    of the project; specifically, she describes the interpersonal and team skills technique
    that can encompass techniques such as active listening, conflict management, cultural
    awareness, meeting management, networking, and political awareness.

73. A. The question describes the Monitor and Control Project Work process. The following
    are tools and techniques of the process: expert judgment, data analysis (alternatives
    analysis, cost-benefit analysis, earned-value analysis, root-cause analysis, trend analysis,
    variance analysis), decision-making, and meetings.

74. B. The project manager in this scenario is performing the Control Schedule process using
    the schedule compression technique, which looks at ways of compressing the schedule
    through fast-tracking or crashing. Specifically, the question describes the crashing
    compression technique.

75. B. Explicit knowledge is knowledge that can be captured and described using words,
    numbers, and images. Tacit knowledge, on the other hand, is much more challenging to
    capture and express.

76. C. According to the PMBOK(R) Guide, the purpose of the Perform Integrated Change
    Control process is to review all change requests; approve changes and manage changes to
    deliverables, project documents, and the project management plan; and communicate the
    decisions.

77. C. When parties withdraw or avoid, they never reach resolution. In some cases, this
    technique involves a party leaving the conversation; in this scenario, the project manager
    closed out the conversation without resolution.

78. A. Dependency determination and integration is one of four tools and techniques of the
    Sequence Activities process. It involves identifying mandatory, discretionary, external, and
    internal dependencies that exist and that should be considered when building the project
    schedule network diagram.

79. C. Projects that evolve into ongoing operations are considered projects that end because
    of addition; in other words, they become their own ongoing business units.
312                Answers Appendix



 80. C. To calculate the late start of activity F, you would first need to perform a forward pass
     and a backward pass.
            Figure 6.3 shows the network diagram with early start and early finish dates calculated.

Figure 6.3                     Network diagram backward pass

                                     Early        Total      Early       Early         Total     Early
                                     Start: 3     Float:     Finish: 8   Start: 9      Float:    Finish: 11
                                                Activity Name:                      Activity Name:
                                                      B                                    E
                                     Late         Duration: Late         Late          Duration: Late
                                     Start: 3     6         Finish: 8    Start: 9      3         Finish: 11




 Early        Total      Early       Early        Total      Early        Early         Total        Early        Early     Total      Early
 Start: 1     Float:     Finish: 2   Start: 3     Float:     Finish: 6    Start: 12     Float:       Finish: 13   Start: 14 Float:     Finish: 18
            Activity Name:                      Activity Name:                        Activity Name:                      Activity Name:
                  A                                   C                                     F                                   G
 Late         Duration: Late         Late         Duration: Late          Late          Duration: Late            Late      Duration: Late
 Start: 1     2         Finish: 2    Start: 8     4         Finish: 11    Start: 12     2         Finish: 13      Start: 14 5         Finish: 18



                                     Early        Total      Early
                                     Start: 3     Float:     Finish: 9
                                                Activity Name:
                                                      D
                                     Late         Duration: Late
                                     Start: 5     7         Finish: 11




 81. B. According to the PMBOK(R) Guide, an individual project risk is defined as an uncertain
     event or condition that, if it occurs, has a positive or negative effect on one or more
     project objectives.

 82. C. Implementing approved changes occurs as part of the Direct and Manage Project
     Work process, which is part of the Executing process group.

 83. C. The Project Scope Management Knowledge Area contains six project management
     processes: Plan Scope Management, Collect Requirements, Define Scope, Create WBS,
     Validate Scope, and Control Scope.

 84. A. Dr. Bruce Tuckman and Mary Ann Jensen developed a model that describes how
     teams develop and mature. According to this model, the team goes through five stages of
     development: forming, storming, norming, performing, and adjourning. During the form
     stage, the team has a tendency to be reserved and formal as they get to know each other.

 85. D. Work performance information, not data, compares actual communication
     implemented against what was planned. Work performance data is an input to the process
     and instead represents raw data of the project, such as what was communicated. It does
     not reflect an analysis of the information.
                                            Chapter 6: Full-Length Practice Exam                313



86. B. The project manager failed to perform quality control activities. The purpose of the
    Control Quality process is to ensure that results generated by the project are complete,
    correct, and meet customer expectations.

87. B. Respect involves the way we conduct ourselves, the way we treat others, listening to
    other viewpoints, and conducting ourselves in a professional manner. As more and more
    companies are operating across the global landscape, project managers are having to
    increase their awareness of cultural influences and customary practices and be conscious
    of this for their teams to avoid things such as culture shock.

88. C. The Monitor Communications process is responsible for ensuring that communication
    activities performed are effective and align with communication planned.

89. A. Factors such as the availability of resources, skill levels, training needs, and other
    elements are considered when developing the resource management plan.

90. C. The project manager is performing the Manage Project Knowledge process, which
    generates the following outputs: lessons learned register, project management plan
    updates, and organizational process assets updates. Other options listed in the question
    are tools and techniques versus outputs of the process.

91. B. The sponsor is asking for the to-complete performance index (TCPI). To calculate
    TCPI, assuming that the budget at completion (BAC) is still considered to be viable, use
    the following formula: BAC = (BAC - EV) / (BAC - AC). Plug in the values provided to
    get the following:
     ($55,000 - $30,000) / ($55,000 - $35,000) = $1.25
     A TCPI of 1.25 means that the team must increase their performance efficiency in order to
     complete the project according to plan.

92. A. In a project-oriented organization, the project manager's level of authority is high. In
    many cases, project team members report and work under the authority of the project
    manager and are released at the conclusion of the project.

93. D. You are currently performing the Create WBS process, which belongs to the Project
    Scope Management Knowledge Area.

94. C. In a project-oriented structure, team members are typically released from their
    assignments when a project closes. This is because the team is typically dedicated to the
    project. They may shift into another project or be released from the organization.

95. C. The Control Procurements process is responsible for managing procurement
    relationships, monitoring contract performance, addressing changes and corrective actions
    needed, and closing out agreements.

96. D. The Identify Stakeholders process is responsible for identifying project stakeholders
    and analyzing and documenting information about them, such as their interests, impact,
    influence, and involvement. This process should be performed early on in the project's life
    cycle and repeated periodically.
314        Answers Appendix



 97. C. During the final stages of a project's life cycle, stakeholders have the least amount
     of influence. During this stage, it is unlikely that a stakeholder may get a scope change
     approved.

 98. D. As part of the Control Procurements process, approved change requests are
     implemented.

 99. B. The formula for calculating estimate to complete (ETC) when the project is expected
     to progress as planned is as follows: EAC - AC. Plug in the values provided to result in the
     following: $55,000 - $45,000 = $10,000.

100. C. Enterprise environmental factors encompasses the organization's culture, structure,
     infrastructure, and personnel administration. Human resource management policies are
     included as part of these internal factors.

101. D. Shewhart invented the Plan-Do-Check-Act cycle and is also considered the grandfather
     of TQM. Juran developed the fitness for use theory, Deming says quality is a management
     problem, and Feigenbaum is the founder of TQM.

102. D. Since an issue has not occurred as of yet, the project manager is likely to take
     preventive actions. Preventive actions are submitted through a change request, which is
     then evaluated and dispositioned through the project's change control board.

103. A. The Project Integration Management Knowledge Area contains the high-level
     processes that integrate the work generated out of the other Knowledge Areas. From a
     closure standpoint, the Close Project or Phase process falls within this group of processes
     and is the only formal process that belongs to the Closing process group.

104. D. The Monitoring and Controlling process group is concerned with monitoring and
     tracking whether the progress and performance of the project are in line with the plan. If
     they are not or there are indicators that performance may deteriorate, then corrective or
     preventive actions are brought forward and dispositioned through this process group.

105. B. When selecting projects using a weighted scoring model, simply multiply a project's
     score against the weight assigned for each criterion and then add the score for all criteria
     to generate an overall project score. The project with the highest overall score should be
     selected. The following table reflects the project scores calculated for this scenario:

      Criterion         Weight Project A Project A Project B Project B Project C Project C
                               score*    totals    score*    totals    score*    totals
      Profit potential 5         2          10         5          25         1           5
      Marketability     3        5          15         2          6          2           6
      Ease to produce/ 1         1          1          2          2          5           5
      support
      Weighted score --          --         26         --         33         --          16
      *5 = highest
                                                                          Chapter 6: Full-Length Practice Exam                                      315



106. C. Manage Quality is a process that is performed as part of executing the project work,
     rather than as part of the Monitoring and Controlling activities. The process does leverage
     outputs of the Control Quality process, which belongs to the Monitoring and Controlling
     process group.

107. C. Alice needs to further develop her strategic and business management skills. This skill
     set includes the ability to see and understand the high-level overview of the organization
     and how projects link to the organization's strategic goals.

108. A. Claims administration is a tool and technique of the Control Procurements process.
     Claims administration involves addressing contested changes between the buyer and
     seller, which then converts into a claim.

109. C. The Project Integration Management Knowledge Area has a total of seven project
     management processes: Develop Project Charter, Develop Project Management Plan,
     Direct and Manage Project Work, Manage Project Knowledge, Monitor and Control
     Project Work, Perform Integrated Change Control, and Close Project or Phase.

110. D. Total float refers to the amount of time you can delay the earliest start of an activity
     without delaying the ending of the project. To calculate total float, you would first need to
     draw the network diagram and then perform a forward pass and a backward pass. Next,
     subtract either the early start from the late start or the early finish from the late finish
     (both should give you the same answer).
            Figure 6.4 shows the network diagram with total float calculated.

Figure 6.4                     Network diagram total float

                                      Early        Total      Early            Early         Total       Early
                                      Start: 3     Float: 0   Finish: 8        Start: 9      Float: 0    Finish: 11
                                                 Activity Name:                           Activity Name:
                                                       B                                         E
                                      Late         Duration: Late              Late          Duration: Late
                                      Start: 3     6         Finish: 8         Start: 9      3         Finish: 11




 Early        Total      Early        Early        Total      Early             Early         Total        Early        Early     Total      Early
 Start: 1     Float: 0   Finish: 2    Start: 3     Float: 5   Finish: 6         Start: 12     Float: 0     Finish: 13   Start: 14 Float: 0   Finish: 18
            Activity Name:                       Activity Name:                             Activity Name:                      Activity Name:
                  A                                    C                                          F                                   G
 Late         Duration: Late          Late         Duration: Late               Late          Duration: Late            Late      Duration: Late
 Start: 1     2         Finish: 2     Start: 8     4         Finish: 11         Start: 12     2         Finish: 13      Start: 14 5         Finish: 18



                                      Early        Total      Early
                                      Start: 3     Float: 2   Finish: 9
                                                 Activity Name:
                                                       D
                                      Late         Duration: Late
                                      Start: 5     7         Finish: 11
316        Answers Appendix



111. D. The stakeholder engagement plan is where the strategies and actions are captured for
     engaging stakeholders. Strategies may include how to increase their level of involvement
     and engaging them in the decision-making process.

112. B. When developing the project management plan, soft skills become key, particularly
     in cases where the stakeholder group is large. In the context of developing the project
     management plan, interpersonal and team skills involves conflict management,
     facilitation, and meeting management. Bringing stakeholders into alignment with each
     other is a part of resolving conflicts.

113. C. Expert power occurs when the person being influenced believes the manager, or the
     person doing the influencing, is knowledgeable about the subject or has special abilities
     that make them an expert. The person goes along just because they think the influencer
     knows what they're doing and it's the best thing for the situation.

114. C. Extinction means that the project was completed successfully and has ended as a
     result of achieving its goals and receiving stakeholder acceptance. A project ending as a
     result of budget reduction occurs as a result of starvation. If the budget cuts occurred due
     to redistribution, then it is considered to end as a result of integration.

115. B. Weekly status updates are an example of work performance reports, which are
     produced out of the Monitor and Control Project Work process.

116. D. Judy and the team will need the scope baseline, which includes the work breakdown
     structure. The team will take the work packages and further decompose them into a series
     of activities that will form the activity list--an output of the Define Activities process.

117. A. The Validate Scope process, not the Control Scope process, is responsible for the
     formal acceptance of project deliverables.

118. B. To calculate cost variance, simply subtract actual cost from earned value. A positive
     number means that the project is performing under budget; a negative number means that
     the project is performing over budget. Cost variance calculation: $7,000 - $5,000 = $2,000.

119. A. The Control Quality process is responsible for verifying the correctness of a
     deliverable, while the Validate Scope process is responsible for obtaining formal
     acceptance of the deliverable. Formal acceptance occurs after quality control activities are
     performed.

120. D. The scenario presented describes administrative closure activities, which occur as part
     of the Close Project or Phase process. While procurements are closed through the Control
     Procurements process, administrative closure of procurements occurs through the Close
     Project or Phase process.

121. D. The risk management plan captures information on how risk management will be
     performed for the project. This includes risk management roles and responsibilities,
     among other key risk management information. Although project management plan is
     technically a correct choice, it is not as specific as the risk management plan; the risk
     management plan is therefore a better choice.
                                             Chapter 6: Full-Length Practice Exam                317



122. B. The Control Quality process is responsible for determining the correctness of
     deliverables. After deliverables are created, quality control activities inspect them to
     ensure correctness before the deliverable is formally accepted through the Validate Scope
     process.

123. B. Functional organizations are typically organized by functions or departments. It is
     considered to be the more traditional type of structure, where the functional manager
     has the majority of the authority and the project manager role is part-time or carried out
     along with other operational duties.

124. B. The Project Integration Management Knowledge Area is the only Knowledge Area that
     has processes across all five process groups. It contains the high-level processes that bring
     the results of the remaining Knowledge Areas together, unifying and coordinating all
     project management activities.

125. C. Activities associated with the Control Scope process are intended to ensure that the
     completed scope of the project maps to the planned scope. Adding scope outside of the
     change control process, as the director of development did in the question's scenario, is
     known as scope creep.

126. D. Autocratic decision-making is where a single individual makes the decision for the
     group.

127. C. Finish-to-start is the most commonly used logical relationship, not start-to-finish.

128. B. Risks are identified primarily through two processes: Identify Risks and Monitor
     Risks. It should be noted that risks can be identified at any point throughout the project,
     as a result of carrying out project activities.

129. B. The cost management plan contains the approved approach for determining the
     budget, managing it, and controlling it. It also captures additional key details, such as
     the rules of performance measurement, control thresholds, units of measure and levels of
     precision used, and so on.

130. D. The scope baseline consists of the work breakdown structure (WBS), the WBS
     dictionary, and the project scope statement. The scope baseline should also contain
     planning packages and work packages, which are components of the WBS.

131. C. Schedule compression uses fast-tracking or crashing compression techniques to bring
     delayed activities back in line with the plan. Allocating additional resources to critical
     activities describes the crashing technique; fast-tracking is where you complete two
     activities in parallel in order to complete the work faster.

132. A. To calculate the total number of communication channels, use the following formula,
     where N represents the total number of stakeholders: N (N - 1) / 2. Plug in the values to
     come up with the following: $65 (65 - 1) / 2 = $2,080.

133. C. The risk register contains risks identified and information about individual risks; this
     includes risk response plans, triggers that indicate a plan should be implemented, and risk
     response owners.
318        Answers Appendix



134. B. Abraham Maslow theorized that humans have five basic needs arranged in hierarchical
     order. The first is physical needs, such as food, clothing, and shelter. The idea is that these
     needs must be met before the person can move to the next level of needs in the hierarchy,
     safety and security needs.

135. C. The project manager is performing the Validate Scope process in this scenario, where
     a key output is the accepted deliverables. To accept deliverables, the committee would
     need to confirm that they have been verified through quality control activities. Verified
     deliverables is an input of the process.

136. B. Recalls and project decisions can have a direct impact on the cost of quality.

137. B. Organizational structure, culture, and management practices are examples of
     enterprise environmental factors; all other options are examples of organizational process
     assets.

138. B. The risk report is first created out of the Identify Risks process and is updated as other
     risk-related processes are carried out. It contains an assessment of the current overall
     project risk exposure, including the agreed-upon risk response strategy. This is an input of
     the Implement Risk Responses process.

139. D. Cost of quality is a tool and technique of Plan Quality Management through data
     analysis. Internal failure costs are a cost of quality that results in rework, scrapping, and
     downtime. You have the ability to control internal failure costs while the product is still
     under the control of the organization.

140. A. Interpersonal skills are used when performing the Manage Stakeholder Engagement
     and Monitor Stakeholder Engagement processes, not the Identify Stakeholders process.
     Tools and techniques of Identify Stakeholders include expert judgment, data gathering,
     data analysis, data representation, and meetings.

141. D. Dr. Bruce Tuckman and Mary Ann Jensen developed a model that describes how
     teams develop and mature. According to this model, the team goes through five stages
     of development: forming, storming, norming, performing, and adjourning. During
     the performing stage, the team is productive, is effective, and is operating at optimum
     performance.

142. B. A triangular distribution calculation involves taking an average of the optimistic, most
     likely, and pessimistic estimates. Simply add up the three estimates and divide by 3: ((ML)
     $72 + (O) $55 + (P) $85) / 3 = $70.67.

143. D. The sponsor is looking for the variance at completion (VAC). Use the following
     formula to calculate VAC: BAC - EAC. Plug in the values to result in the following:
     $25,000 - $32,000 = - $7,000. A VAC of -$7,000 means that the project is expected to
     complete with a deficit of $7,000.

144. A. The Manage Quality process is the second of three quality management processes. The
     purpose of this process is to translate the quality management plan into quality activities
     that are executable and to ensure that the quality policies of the organization are factored
     into the project.
                                              Chapter 6: Full-Length Practice Exam              319



145. B. In 2001, several software developers converged to formalize the Agile approach. They
     published the manifesto for Agile software development and identified 12 principles that
     are the focus of any Agile approach.

146. A. Referent power is inferred to the influencer by his or her subordinates. Project team
     members who have a great deal of respect and high regard for their project managers
     willingly go along with decisions made by the project manager because of referent power.

147. C. Fairness includes avoiding favoritism and discrimination against others, avoiding and
     reporting conflict-of-interest situations, and maintaining impartiality in a decision-making
     process. A conflict of interest is when you put your personal interests above the interests
     of the project or when you use your influence to cause others to make decisions in your
     favor without regard for the project outcome.

148. D. The Plan Communications Management process has a total of eight tools and
     techniques: expert judgment, communication requirements analysis, communication
     technology, communication models, communication methods, interpersonal and team
     skills, data representation, and meetings.

149. B. The Tuckman-Jensen model consists of the following stages of team development:
     forming, storming, norming, performing, and adjourning.

150. B. Alyssa is using a virtual team. Virtual teams are individuals who work toward a
     unified goal but who spend little to no time meeting in person. Instead, these teams use
     technology to interact and communicate.

151. D. The project sponsor is requesting a final report, which is an output of the Close Project
     or Phase process. These administrative closure activities can occur at the phase level, to
     wrap up the phase, and at the overall project level.

152. C. Seller proposals are an input, not an output of the Conduct Procurements process.
     This process instead results in selected sellers.

153. B. A cost performance index (CPI) that is < 1 indicates that the project is over budget.
     This means that crashing the schedule, which is typically a costly activity, is not an
     option. To impact the schedule, Sue will need to focus on activities that fall on the critical
     path, in other words, "critical" activities.

154. A. The purpose of the Validate Scope process is to formalize acceptance of completed
     project deliverables.

155. C. Quality metrics are first identified in the Plan Quality Management process.
     Performance of the product will be measured and evaluated against these metrics as
     quality control measurements are collected in the Control Quality process.

156. C. Plurality is where a decision is made based on the largest grouping of votes. For
     example, if option A has 3 votes, option B has 5 votes, and option C has 4 votes, then
     option B wins, even if it does not have the total majority votes.
320        Answers Appendix



157. B. Legitimate, or formal, power comes about as a result of the influencer's position.
     Because that person is the project manager, executive vice president, or CEO, they have
     the power to call the shots and make decisions.

158. D. Earned-value analysis is used to compare the performance measurement baseline to
     actual schedule and cost performance. This will allow the project manager to identify
     three key values important to calculating the performance of the project: planned value,
     earned value, and actual cost.

159. B. Root-cause analysis is a data analysis technique that focuses on the identification of
     the root causes of variances, defects, or risk. The idea is that addressing the root cause (or
     causes) will address the overall problem, versus just individual issues.

160. B. Dr. Bruce Tuckman and Mary Ann Jensen developed a model that describes how
     teams develop and mature. According to this model, the team goes through five stages
     of development: forming, storming, norming, performing, and adjourning. During the
     storming stage, team members confront one another and vie for position and control.

161. A. The scope of programs encompasses the various components that exist within them.
     The scope of the program is to generate the documented benefits to an organization by
     ensuring that the program components are delivered in a coordinated and complementary
     manner.

162. B. The project sponsor is requesting a final report, which is an output of the Close Project
     or Phase process. The final report may be created to summarize the work of a phase or
     for the overall project. It typically provides an overall summary of the work completed, a
     summary of performance against objectives (such as scope, quality, cost objectives), and a
     summary of risks and issues.

163. A. Management reserves are funds set aside for unexpected situations and are used at the
     discretion of management (hence the name). Management reserves are not considered to
     be a part of the cost baseline but are a part of the overall project budget.

164. B. Paul Hersey and Ken Blanchard developed the Situational Leadership Theory during
     the mid-1970s. This theory's main premise is that the leadership style you use depends on
     the situation.

165. D. Extinction is where a project ends because it is completed and accepted by
     stakeholders. For this reason, it is considered the best type of ending.

166. B. The conflict management technique known as forcing is also referred to as directing.
     Forcing/directing is where one person forces a solution on the other parties.

167. B. Using an Agile approach, a project team can assess results and adjust processes to meet
     new or modified requirements.

168. B. It is likely that scope creep occurred and that a change request was not submitted and
     reviewed by the change control board before it was implemented.

169. B. In a predictive life cycle, the project's scope, time, and cost are determined during
     the early phases of the project, meaning that the majority of planning occurs up front.
     Changes are closely managed following a change control processes.
                                             Chapter 6: Full-Length Practice Exam               321



170. A. The sponsor is looking for the estimate at completion (EAC). The EAC estimates (or
     forecasts) the expected total cost of a work component, a schedule activity, or the project
     at its completion by calculating the actual costs to date and then adding an estimate of
     what the remaining work will cost.

171. A. Histograms are bar charts that show volume by source or component. In the case of
     quality control, histograms typically focus on the total number of defects.

172. A. Philip Crosby developed the zero defects practice, which promoted getting it right the
     first time. Crosby theorized that costs increase when quality planning isn't performed up
     front, which means you'll have to engage in rework, thereby affecting productivity. He
     therefore advocated for prevention.

173. D. In this scenario, the project manager is performing the Manage Stakeholder
     Engagement process. The stakeholder engagement plan is created out of the Plan
     Stakeholder Engagement process and documents guidance and information to aid in
     managing stakeholder expectations, as well as to promote stakeholder interaction and
     engagement.

174. D. The project manager in this scenario is carrying out the Manage Team process. This
     process involves tracking team member performance, providing the team with feedback,
     resolving issues among team members, and managing team changes to optimize project
     performance.

175. A. Tacit knowledge is knowledge that is challenging to capture and express, such as
     insights, experience, and beliefs. Explicit knowledge, on the other hand, is knowledge that
     can be captured and described using words, numbers, and images.

176. D. Work performance data is the raw data of the project. In the context of monitoring
     risks, it consists of information about the identified risks, such as whether risk responses
     have been implemented, whether they are active or closed, and so on.

177. A. The tools and techniques of the Plan Quality Management process include expert
     judgment, data gathering, data analysis, decision-making, data representation, test and
     inspection planning, and meetings.

178. C. A rough order of magnitude ranges from -25% to +75%, whereas a definitive range
     spans -5% to +10%.

179. C. Bottom-up estimating involves further decomposing an activity or work item being
     estimated into smaller components and then aggregating the estimates up to the original
     level. This is a time-consuming and sometimes costly technique, but it yields a good
     degree of confidence and accuracy.

180. C. Theory Z was developed by Dr. William Ouchi. This theory is concerned with
     increasing employee loyalty to their organizations; it puts an emphasis on the well-being
     of the employees both at work and outside of work, it encourages steady employment, and
     it leads to high employee satisfaction and morale.
322        Answers Appendix



181. B. Autocratic leaders tend to make decisions based on their own opinions. All decisions
     are made by the leader with little to no input from the team.

182. B. In this scenario, users demanded compliance with ISO standards. Although the
     scenario notes that they mandated compliance, this is not driven by a law or regulation.
     Other reasons that projects come about include competitive forces, political changes, new
     technology, stakeholder demands, business process improvements, and material issues.

183. D. Punishment power should be used as a last resort and only after all other forms of
     power have been exhausted.

184. B. Douglas McGregor defined two models of worker behavior, Theory X and Theory Y,
     that attempt to explain how different managers deal with their team members. Theory Y
     managers believe people are interested in performing their best, given the right motivation
     and proper expectations. These managers provide support to their teams, are concerned
     about their team members, and often entrust their team to perform the functions of their
     positions with limited supervision.

185. C. Earned value is the measure of work performed expressed in terms of the budget
     authorized for that work.

186. D. According to the PMBOK(R) Guide, there are three key dimensions developed and
     monitored through earned value management: planned value, earned value, and actual
     cost.

187. C. The purpose of the Manage Communications process is to ensure the timely and
     effective collection, distribution, and management of project information.

188. A. Laissez-faire is considered to be the opposite of an autocratic leadership style.
     Following a laissez-faire leadership approach, the leader allows the team to drive decisions
     and recommend actions and has little involvement in the process.

189. B. Operational work is repetitive and ongoing and typically reflects standard work that is
     carried out within a department or team. Projects, on the other hand, tend to bring about
     some type of change and consist of work that is considered to be temporary and unique.

190. B. Contingency reserves are funds set aside to address risks that have materialized. This
     reserve is considered to be part of the cost baseline, whereas management reserves are not.

191. C. The Manage Team process is where team member performance is tracked, feedback
     is given, issues are resolved, and team changes occur to optimize the performance of the
     project.

192. C. In a fixed-price agreement, the seller and buyer agree to a set price for the goods or
     services provided by the seller. If the cost of providing the goods or services increases for
     the seller, they must absorb the additional cost, which presents them with a higher risk.
     Since the buyer knows the costs up front, the risk for the buyer is low.

193. A. Statistical sampling is a data-gathering technique of the Control Quality process. This
     technique looks at a sample set of a population in order to measure controls and verify
     quality (such as measuring size and determining whether the sample set fits within a
     tolerable range, as defined within the quality management plan).
                                             Chapter 6: Full-Length Practice Exam                323



194. A. Statistical sampling involves taking a sample number of parts from the whole
     population and inspecting them to determine whether they fall within acceptable
     variances.

195. A. Frederick Herzberg came up with the Hygiene Theory, also known as the Motivation-
     Hygiene Theory. He postulates that two factors contribute to motivation: hygiene factors
     and motivators.

196. A. This question asks that you calculate the estimate at completion (EAC) factoring in
     CPI and SPI.
      EAC = AC + [(BAC - EV) / (CPI x SPI)]
      To plug the values into the formula, you must first calculate CPI and SPI. The formulas
      are as follows: CPI = EV / AC, and SPI = EV / PV. Plug in the values to result in the
      following:
      CPI: $250 / $250 = $1.0
      SPI: $250 / $200 = $1.25
      Plug in the values to result in the following EAC:
      $250 + [($300 - $250) / ($1.0 x $1.25)] = $290

197. A. According to Douglas McGregor, Theory X managers believe most people do not like
     work and will try to steer clear of it; they believe people have little to no ambition, need
     constant supervision, and won't actually perform the duties of their jobs unless threatened.

198. C. An acquisition or merger of two business entities is an example of a strategic
     opportunity or business need that leads to the creation of a project. Other reasons that
     projects come about include competitive forces, political changes, new technology,
     stakeholder demands, business process improvements, and material issues.

199. C. A beta distribution calculation involves giving a greater weight to the most likely
     estimate. Simply multiply the most likely estimate by four, add the result with the other
     two estimates, and divide by six: (4x(ML) $72 + (O) $55 + (P) $85) / 6 = $71.3.

200. D. The project management plan is a formal document that defines how the project will
     be executed, monitored and controlled, and closed. It is a compilation of subsidiary plans
     and baselines, including the scope, cost, and schedule baselines.
Index
Note to the Reader: Italicized page numbers indicate illustrations.



                                                         scrum masters, 243
A                                                        servant leadership approach, 158, 166, 291, 294
accommodating, conflict-resolution technique, 269    agreements
Achievement Theory, 83, 195, 264, 275, 306               confidentiality agreements, 164, 293
Acquire Resources process, 91, 203, 267, 310             examples, 103, 271
    enterprise environmental factors, 82, 88, 106,       preassignments, 198, 307
          264, 266, 272                                  procurement agreements, 203, 310
    inputs, 114, 275                                     vendor agreements, 112, 274
    organizational process assets, 93, 268           alternatives analysis, 61, 256
    outputs, 97, 269                                 analogous estimating, 47, 53, 58, 73, 251, 253,
    tools and techniques, 100, 270                         254, 261
active risk acceptance, 76, 262                      AON (activity on node), 250
activities                                           appraisal costs, 48, 251
    administrative closure activities, 163, 170,     approved change requests, 81, 96, 98, 99, 116,
          173, 180, 202, 293, 296, 297, 300,               264, 269, 270, 276
          310, 316                                   arrow diagramming method (ADM), 42, 249
    Define Activities process, 50-51, 64,            assumption log, 37, 247
          252, 257                                   assumptions, 37, 246
    Estimate Activity Durations process, 47, 53,     attributes sampling, 129, 280
          58, 73, 251, 253, 254, 261                 autocratic leadership style, 228, 322
    Estimate Activity Resources process, 53, 195,    avoid, conflict-resolution technique, 105, 206,
          253, 306                                         272, 311
    ongoing activities, 171, 173, 296, 297
    Sequence Activities process, 236, 253, 280,
          311
activity attributes, 50, 252
                                                     B
activity on node (AON), 250                          bar charts, histograms, 135, 282
actual costs, 143, 286                               basic physical needs, Maslow's Hierarchy of
addition, as cause of project closeout, 155, 167,         Needs, 115, 275
      178, 206, 289, 294, 299, 311                   basis of estimates, 66-67, 185, 258, 302
adjourning stage of team development, 104, 106,      benefit measurement methods, 3, 17, 234, 239
      272, 302                                          cash flow analysis
ADM (arrow diagramming method), 42, 249                     discounted, 24, 241
administrative closure activities, 163,                     payback period, 3, 13, 19, 25, 28, 31, 34,
      170, 173, 180, 202, 293, 296, 297, 300,                     234, 237, 239, 242, 243, 244, 245
      310, 316                                              results of, 19, 240
advertising, Conduct Procurements process, 101,         cost-benefit analysis, 76, 262
      270                                            benefit-cost ratio, 22, 240
affinity diagrams, 98, 269                           best practices, 201, 309
Agile Manifesto, 4, 221, 234, 319                    beta distribution, 43, 232, 249, 255, 323
Agile project management, 27, 242                    bidder conferences, 103, 200, 271, 308
    benefits, 226, 320                               bottom-up estimating, 52, 59, 74, 228, 255, 262, 321
    characteristics, 173, 177, 297, 299              brainstorming, 22, 241
    common roles, 165, 294                           burndown charts, 28, 243
    implementation strategy, 168, 295                business case, 3, 15, 124, 190, 238, 304
    product owners, 27, 243                          business needs, 23, 241
326         C-Type diagrams - conflicts of interest



                                                          integration as cause of, 167, 176, 186-187,
C                                                               196, 290, 294, 298, 303, 306
C-Type diagrams, 100, 270                                 ongoing activities, 171, 173, 296, 297
                                                          regression analysis, 163, 293
cash flow analysis
                                                          release of resources, 156, 290
    discounted, 24, 241
                                                          releasing project resources, 177, 299
    payback period, 3, 13, 19, 25, 28, 31, 34, 234,
                                                          risk during, 157, 290
          237, 239, 242, 243, 244, 245
                                                          starvation as cause of, 156, 159, 163, 180,
    results of, 19, 240
                                                                290, 291, 293, 300
change control board (CCB), 125, 126, 226, 278,
                                                          stress on organizations, 155, 289
      279, 320
                                                          survey policies, 185, 302
change log, 143, 286
                                                      Code of Ethics and Professional Conduct, 155, 290
change requests, 133, 197, 282, 307
                                                          core values, 298
    approved, 81, 96, 98, 99, 116, 264, 269, 270,
                                                              fairness, 162, 180, 183, 186, 222, 292,
          276
                                                                   300, 301, 303, 319
    causes, 101, 270
                                                              honesty, 157, 159, 164, 169, 186, 187, 290,
    claims administration, 213, 315
                                                                   291, 293, 295, 301, 302, 303
    post-approval process, 81, 264
                                                              respect, 156, 169, 172, 187, 208, 290, 295,
change-driven life cycles, 14, 238
                                                                   296, 297, 303, 313
channels of communication, 62, 219, 256, 317
                                                              responsibility, 88, 158, 165, 174, 176, 179,
charts
                                                                   180, 183, 266, 291, 293, 298, 299,
    burndown, 28, 243
                                                                   300, 301
    control, 146, 287
                                                          groups applicable to, 178
    iteration burndown, 139, 284
                                                          violations by team members, 163, 166, 293,
    RACI, 26, 75, 77, 262                                       294
check sheets, 147, 287                                collaborate, conflict-resolution technique, 94,
claims administration, 120, 124, 213, 276, 278, 315         108, 195, 205, 272, 273, 286, 306
Close Project or Phase process                        Collect Requirements process, 77, 263
    administrative closure activities, 163, 170,      colocation, 85, 204, 265, 310
          180, 202, 293, 296, 300, 310                communication channels, 62, 219, 256, 317
    archiving-related outputs, 155, 289               communications management plan, 50, 113, 252,
    inputs, 168, 171, 295, 296                              275
    key activities, 155, 290                          communications plan, 50, 252
    Knowledge Area of, 158, 291                       communications requirements analysis, 62, 256
    lessons learned, 173, 297                         composite resource calendars, 95, 268
    organizational process assets, 155, 183, 289,     Conduct Procurements process, 92, 268
          301                                             inputs, 103, 271
    outputs, 172, 297                                     tools and techniques, 200, 308
    timing of, 166, 294                               confidentiality agreements, 164, 293
    tools and techniques, 183, 301                    configuration management, 119, 130, 134-135,
    transitioning activities, 171, 296                      276, 281, 282
closed procurements output, 129, 163, 172, 280,       configuration status accounting, 130, 281
      293, 297                                        conflict-resolution techniques, 101, 270
Closing process group, 175, 179, 180, 298, 300            accommodate, 269
    contract closure, 168, 295                            avoid, 105, 206, 272, 311
    product verification, 161, 292                        collaborate, 94, 108, 195, 205, 272, 273, 286, 306
    risk in, 157, 290                                     direct, 85, 225, 320
closing projects                                          force, 225, 320
    addition as cause of, 155, 167, 178, 206, 289,        reconcile, 194, 305
          294, 299, 311                                   smooth, 98, 269
    characteristics of project closure, 188, 303      conflicts of interest
    extinction as cause of, 165, 175, 186, 215,           among team members, 177, 299
          225, 294, 298, 302, 316, 320                    avoiding, 185, 188, 302, 303
    final reports, 161, 170, 173, 176-177, 182,           core value addressing, 162, 222, 292, 319
          292, 296, 297, 299, 301                         gifts and, 182, 301
                  constrained optimization methods - data-representation tools                        327



   PMP credential holders and, 157, 291                     cost baseline, 67, 258
   procurement policy violations, 186, 302                  cost-benefit analysis, 76, 262
   project manager responsibilities, 179, 300               cost management plan, 218, 317
   with stakeholders, 30, 38, 244, 247                      cost measurement plan, 48, 251
constrained optimization methods, 21, 240                   cost of poor quality, 196, 306, 318
constraints                                                 cost of quality, 192, 219, 220, 305, 318
   documenting, 37, 247                                     cost performance index (CPI), 201, 223, 277,
   triple constraints, 162, 292                                   284, 285, 288, 309, 319, 323
contingency plans, 262                                      cost variance (CV), 216, 283, 285, 316
contingency reserves, 230, 284, 322                         Estimate Costs process, 57, 65, 254, 257
Contingency Theory, 90, 111, 267, 274                       life-cycle costing, 16, 239
contracts                                                   peak point, 29, 243
   cost plus fixed fee (CPFF) contracts, 74, 262            stage of lowest, 168, 295
   cost-reimbursable contracts, 71, 195, 261, 306           warrant period costs, 64, 257
   fixed-price contracts, 72, 230, 261, 262, 322        CPFF (cost plus fixed fee) contracts, 74, 262
   fixed-price incentive fee contracts, 74, 261, 262    crashing, schedule compression technique, 205,
   fixed-price with economic price adjustment                 218, 255, 297, 311, 317
         (FP-EPA) contracts, 75, 262                    Create WBS process, 66, 77, 210, 257, 263, 313
   negotiated draft contracts, 85, 265                  critical path, 42, 69, 136, 193, 248, 248, 249,
   synonyms for, 113, 275                                     258, 259, 283, 305, 305
control charts, 146, 287                                Crosby, Philip, 57, 226, 254, 321
Control Costs process                                   cultural awareness, 100, 270
   purpose, 121, 277                                    culture shock, 159, 167, 174, 291, 294, 298
   tools and techniques, 124-125, 127, 278, 279         customer requests, 15, 238
Control Procurements process, 127, 132, 147,            CV (cost variance), 216, 283, 285, 316
      280, 281, 287
   closed procurements output, 129, 155, 163,
         172, 280, 290, 293, 297
   closing procurements, 188, 303
                                                        D
   outputs, 124, 278                                    daily stand-ups, 30, 244
   tools and techniques, 122, 172, 213, 277, 297, 315   data-analysis tools, 137, 139, 283, 284
Control Quality process, 133, 216, 282, 316, 317           alternatives analysis, 61, 256
   activities, 128, 283                                    cost of quality, 192, 219, 220, 305, 318
   check sheets, 147, 287                                  earned-value analysis, 121, 141, 194, 224, 277,
   control charts, 146, 287                                      285, 305, 320
   purpose, 140, 208, 284, 313                             iteration burndown charts, 139, 284
   scatter diagrams, 148, 288                              Monte Carlo analysis, 60, 200-201,
   tools and techniques, 129, 148, 280, 288                      255, 309
Control Resources process, 127, 196, 279, 306              reserve analysis, 140, 149, 284, 288
Control Schedule process, 128-129, 280                     root-cause analysis, 224, 320
   outputs, 134, 282                                       stakeholder analysis, 13, 236, 238
   purpose, 130, 281                                       trend analysis, 127, 204, 279, 310
   tools and techniques, 137, 148, 197, 283, 288,          variance analysis, 144, 286
         307                                            data-gathering tools
Control Scope process, 128, 199, 215, 280, 308, 316        brainstorming, 22, 241
   activities, 217, 317                                    check sheets, 147, 287
   tools and techniques, 141, 285                          focus groups, 191, 304
corrective actions, 89, 99, 101, 266, 270, 271             statistical sampling, 230, 231, 322, 323
cost plus fixed fee (CPFF) contracts, 74, 262           data-representation tools, 59, 152, 198, 255, 307
cost-reimbursable contracts, 71, 195, 261, 306             affinity diagrams, 98, 269
costs                                                      flowcharts, 90, 267
   actual costs, 143, 286                                  matrix diagrams, 100, 279
   appraisal costs, 48, 251                                salience model, 13, 238
   Control Costs process, 121, 124-125, 127,               stakeholder engagement assessment matrix,
         129, 277, 278                                           255, 289
328          decision-making techniques - final product



decision-making techniques                             earned-value analysis, 121, 141, 194, 205, 224,
    autocratic, 217, 317                                     277, 285, 305, 311, 320
    plurality, 223, 319                                email, 59, 255
decomposition, 41, 48, 247, 251                        EMV analysis, 73, 261
Define Activities process, 50-51, 64, 252, 257         engineering review board, 279
Define Scope process, 44, 250                          enterprise environmental factors
definitive range of estimates, 54, 253                     Acquire Resources process, 82, 88, 106, 264,
Develop Schedule process, 55, 197, 254, 255, 280,               266, 272
      307                                                  Develop Project Management Plan process,
deliverables                                                    220, 318
    accepting, 150, 219, 288, 318                          Identify Stakeholders process, 12, 237
    Direct and Manage Project Work process, 197,       Estimate Activity Durations process
          307                                              analogous estimating, 47, 53, 58, 73, 251, 253,
    project scope statement, 43, 44, 49, 199, 249,              254, 261
          251, 283, 307                                    tools and techniques, 53, 253
    vs. requirements, 51, 252                          Estimate Activity Resources process, 53, 195,
democratic leadership style, 109, 192, 273, 305              253, 306
dependencies                                           estimate at completion (EAC), 122, 123, 130,
    hard, 72, 261                                            138, 140, 143, 144, 205, 226, 277, 278, 281,
    determination, 206, 311                                  283, 284, 286, 311, 321, 323
    discretionary, 57, 254                             Estimate Costs process, 57, 65, 254, 257
    mandatory, 72, 261                                 estimate to complete (ETC), 120, 124, 135, 137,
Determine Budget process, 63, 64, 66, 71, 257,               147, 194, 211, 277, 278, 282, 283, 287, 288,
      258, 261                                               306, 314
Develop Project Charter process, 200, 309              estimating techniques
Develop Project Management Plan process, 43,               analogous estimating, 47, 53, 58, 73, 251, 253,
      50, 65, 249, 252, 257 65, 257                             254, 261
    enterprise environmental factors, 220, 318             bottom-up estimating, 52, 59, 74, 228, 255,
    inputs, 52, 252                                             262, 321
    tools and techniques, 41, 247                          parametric estimating, 63, 77, 256, 263
Develop Team process, 84, 96, 102, 265, 269, 271           three-point estimating, 60, 65, 255, 267
    outputs, 114, 274                                      top-down estimating, 47, 251
    purpose, 85, 196, 265, 306                         ethics violations, 165, 294
    tools and techniques, 80, 263                      Executing process group, 5, 84, 86, 89, 97, 234,
Direct and Manage Project Work process, 96, 98,              265, 266, 269
      112, 269, 274                                        activities, 199, 201, 308, 309
    deliverables, 197, 307                                 corrective actions, 99, 270
    inputs, 110, 116, 190, 274, 276, 304               Expectancy Theory, 89, 105, 198, 267, 272, 307
    key benefit, 191, 304                              expert power, 81, 86, 109, 215, 263, 266, 273,
    outputs, 87, 110, 150, 266, 274, 288                     316
    tools and techniques, 119, 304                     explicit knowledge, 115, 206, 274, 275, 311, 321
directing, conflict management technique, 85,          extinction, as cause of project closure, 165, 175,
      225, 320                                               186, 215, 225, 294, 298, 302, 316, 320
directive PMOs (project management offices), 21, 240
discounted cash flow analysis, 24, 241
discretionary dependencies, 57, 254
diversity training, 100, 164, 171, 270, 293, 296
                                                       F
duration compression, 60, 255                          facilitated workshops, 47, 251
                                                       failure costs, 196, 306, 318
                                                       fairness, 162, 180, 183, 186, 222, 292, 300, 301,
E                                                            303, 319
                                                       fallback plans, 74, 262
earned value (EV), 125, 229, 279, 322                  fast tracking, 16, 23, 30, 239, 241, 243, 317
earned value management, 146, 148, 229, 287,           final product, service, or result transition output,
     288, 322                                                172, 297
                                                                      final reports - lag                329



final reports, 161, 170, 173, 176-177, 182, 222,       information management systems, 80, 263
      225, 292, 296, 297, 299, 301, 319, 320           Initiating process group, 3, 9, 12, 193, 234, 236,
finish-to-start logical relationship, 218, 317               237, 305
fitness for use theory, 190, 204, 304, 310             inputs
fixed-price contracts, 72, 230, 261, 262, 322              Acquire Resources process, 114, 275
fixed-price incentive fee (FPIF) contracts, 74, 261,       Close Project or Phase process, 168, 171, 295, 296
      262                                                  Conduct Procurement process, 103, 271
fixed-price with economic price adjustment                 Define Scope process, 44, 250
      (FP-EPA) contracts, 75, 262                          Develop Project Management Plan process,
flowcharts, 90, 267                                              52, 252
focus groups, 191, 304                                     Direct and Manage Project Work process, 110,
forming stage of team development, 208, 312                      116, 190, 274, 276, 304
forward pass, 200, 308, 308                                Manage Team process, 113, 275
FPIF (fixed-price incentive fee) contracts, 74, 261,       Monitor and Control Project Work process,
      262                                                        120, 141, 276, 285
functional organizational structure, 35, 217, 246,         Plan Communications Management process,
      316                                                        62, 256
functional requirements, 49, 255                       inspection, 122, 277
funding requirements, 67, 258                              Control Quality process, 141, 285
                                                           other names for, 151, 289
                                                           Validate Scope process, 128, 280
H                                                      integration, as cause of project closure, 167, 176,
                                                             186-187, 196, 290, 294, 298, 303, 306
hard dependencies, 72, 261                             intellectual property violations, 295
hard logic, 72, 261                                    interactive communication, 61, 256
Herzberg, Frederick, 231, 309, 323. See also           internal rate of return (IRR), 239, 240, 242, 247,
     Hygiene Theory                                          307
Hierarchy of Needs, 104, 107, 112, 115, 204, 271,      interpersonal skills, 102, 115, 205, 271, 275, 276,
     273, 275, 275 276, 276, 311                             311
highly adaptive life cycles, 26, 28, 242, 243          ISO compliance, 228, 322
highly predictive life cycles, 26, 242                 issue log, 86, 87, 109, 265, 266, 273
histograms, 135, 226, 282, 321                         iteration burndown charts, 139, 284
honesty, 157, 159, 164, 169, 186, 187, 290, 291,       iterations, 26, 31, 242, 244
     293, 295, 301, 302, 303                           iterative life cycles, 33, 182, 244, 301
hybrid life cycles, 171, 296                               characteristics, 162, 292
hybrid organizational structure, 7, 12, 235, 237           goals, 162, 292
Hygiene Theory, 108, 202, 231, 273, 309, 323               timeboxing in, 184-185, 302



I                                                      J
Identify Risks process                                 Juran, Joseph, 190, 204, 304, 310
    data-gathering techniques, 71, 261
    outputs, 220, 318
Identify Stakeholders process, 3, 9, 234, 236          K
    enterprise environmental factors, 12, 237
                                                       kill points, 235, 241
    tools and techniques, 4, 220, 234, 318
                                                       knowledge
Implement Risk Responses process, 97, 133, 269,
                                                           explicit, 115, 206, 274, 275, 311, 321
      282
                                                           tacit, 111, 227, 274, 275, 311, 321
incremental project life cycle, 14, 175, 178-179,
      238, 298, 299
individual project risks, 49, 63, 200, 207, 252,
      256, 257, 309, 312                               L
influencing, 11, 237                                   L-Type diagrams, 100, 270
information exchange, 106, 272                         lag, 49, 128, 252, 280
330         laissez-faire leadership style - ongoing activities



laissez-faire leadership style, 229, 322             meetings
lateral thinking, 49, 251                               bidder conferences, 200, 271, 308
leadership skills, 31, 244                              planning meetings, 195, 306
leadership styles                                       sprint retrospective meetings, 32, 244
    autocratic, 228, 322                                status review meetings, 114, 142, 146, 275,
    democratic, 109, 192, 273, 305                            285, 287
    laissez-faire, 229, 322                          megaprojects, 7, 235
    transactional, 92, 267                           milestones
    transformational, 82, 264                           duration, 67, 258
leads, 128, 280                                         milestone lists, 64, 173, 257, 297
legitimate power, 82, 89, 112, 224, 264, 267, 275,      technical performance analysis, 130, 281, 304
      320                                            mitigation plans, 68, 258
lessons learned, 181, 300                            Monitor and Control Project Work process, 119,
    Close Project or Phase process, 173, 297              138, 276, 283
    procurements, 181, 300                              inputs, 120, 141, 276, 285
    uses, 182, 301                                      outputs, 144, 286
lessons learned register, 86, 178, 192, 265, 297,       tools and techniques, 205, 311
      299, 304                                       Monitor Communications process, 119, 133, 149,
level of accuracy, 65, 257                                208, 209, 276, 282, 288, 312, 313
life cycles. See project life cycles                    organizational process assets, 132, 281
life-cycle costing, 16, 239                             tools and techniques, 131, 281
linear constrained optimization method               Monitor Risks process, 133, 150, 282, 288
lines of communication formula, 53, 56, 253, 254        outputs, 132, 281
                                                        purpose, 125, 191, 279, 304
                                                     Monitor Stakeholder Engagement process, 119,
M                                                         122, 126, 276, 277, 279
                                                        benefits, 202, 310
make-or-buy analysis, 72, 103, 261, 271                 outputs, 151, 289
Manage Communications process, 98, 105, 269, 272        tools and techniques, 128, 280
  organizational process assets, 81, 263, 264        Monitoring and Controlling process group, 122,
  outputs, 111, 274                                       123, 142, 201, 202, 277, 285, 309
  purpose, 82, 229, 264, 322                         Monte Carlo analysis, 60, 200-201, 255, 309
Manage Project Knowledge process, 84, 265            motivational theories
  outputs, 88, 209, 266, 313                            Achievement Theory, 83, 195, 264, 275, 306
  tools and techniques, 192, 304                        Contingency Theory, 90, 111, 267
Manage Quality process, 106, 272                        Expectancy Theory, 89, 105, 198, 267, 272,
  activities, 221, 318                                        307
  tools and techniques, 95, 268                         Hygiene Theory, 108, 202, 231, 273, 309, 323
Manage Stakeholder Engagement process                   Maslow's Hierarchy of Needs, 104, 107, 112,
  outputs, 87, 109, 266, 273                                  115, 204, 271, 273, 275 276, 276, 311
  tools and techniques, 93, 268
Manage Team process, 107, 230, 273, 322
  inputs, 113, 275
  outputs, 211, 314                                  N
  primary concern, 116, 276                          near critical path, 42, 248, 249
  tools and techniques, 115, 276                     negotiated draft contracts, 85, 265
management reserves, 225, 320                        net present value (NPV), 13, 17, 19, 237, 239, 306
management skills tool and technique, Control        nonverbal feedback, 98, 269
    Stakeholder Engagement process, 83, 264          norming stage of team development, 105, 272
mandatory dependencies, 72, 261
market research, 45, 250
Maslow, Abraham, 219, 318
matrix diagrams, 100, 279
                                                     O
McClelland, David, 83, 113, 264, 275, 306            OBS (organization breakdown structure), 52, 252
McGregor, Douglas, 229, 231, 273, 322, 323           ongoing activities, 171, 173, 296, 297
                     organization breakdown structure (OBS) - process analysis                     331



organization breakdown structure (OBS), 52, 252        purpose, 206, 311
organizational process assets, 20, 41, 240, 247        tools and techniques, 120-121, 131, 277, 281
   Acquire Resources process, 93, 268               Perform Qualitative Risk Analysis process, 49, 71,
   Close Project or Phase process, 155, 183, 289,        252, 261
         301                                        Perform Quantitative Risk Analysis, 54, 69, 253,
   Manage Communications process, 81, 263, 264           258
   Monitor Communications process, 132, 281         performance measurement baseline, 126, 279
   project closure survey policies, 185, 302        performing stage of team development, 94-95,
organizational project management (OPM), 6,              220, 267, 318
     235                                            PERT calculations, 55, 56, 253, 254
organizational structures                           phase endings, 5, 235
   examples of, 9, 236                              phase entrances, 241
   functional, 35, 217, 246, 316                    phase gates, 241
   hybrid, 7, 12, 235, 237                          phase reviews, 23, 241
   project-oriented, 7, 168, 210, 235, 295, 313     Plan Communications Management process
Ouchi, William, 103, 271, 321                          inputs, 62, 256
outputs                                                purpose, 49, 251
   Acquire Resources process, 97, 269                  tools and techniques, 62, 222, 256, 319
   Close Project or Phase process, 155, 172, 289,   Plan Procurement Management process, 72, 76,
         297                                             191, 261, 262, 304
   Control Procurements process, 124, 155, 278,     Plan Quality Management process, 198, 219, 220,
         290                                             227, 307, 318, 321
   Control Schedule process, 134, 282               Plan Resource Management process, 10, 47, 236,
   Define Activities process, 50-51, 64, 252, 257        241, 251
   Determine Budget process, 66, 258                Plan Risk Management process, 44, 249
   Develop Team process, 114, 274                   Plan Scope Management process, 47, 251
   Direct and Manage Project Work process, 87,      Plan Stakeholder Engagement process, 60, 64-65,
         110, 150, 266, 274, 288                         68, 256, 257, 258
   Identify Risks process, 220, 318                 Plan-Do-Check-Act cycle, 3, 234
   Manage Communications process, 111, 274          plan-driven life cycles. See predictive life cycles
   Manage Project Knowledge process, 88, 209,       planned value, 148, 279, 287
         266, 313                                   planning meetings, 195, 306
   Manage Stakeholder Engagement process, 87,       Planning process group, 5, 15, 234, 238
         109, 266, 273                              plurality, decision-making technique, 223, 319
   Manage Team process, 211, 314                    PMI (Project Management Institute), 36, 246
   Monitor and Control Project Work process,        PMI Talent Triangle, 13, 33, 205, 236, 238, 245,
         144, 286                                        311
   Monitor Risks process, 132, 281                  PMIS (project management information system),
   Monitor Stakeholder Engagement process,               80, 113, 263, 275
         151, 289                                   PMOs. See project management offices (PMOs)
   Validate Scope process, 123, 278                 portfolio management, 19, 240
overall project risks, 66, 257                      power
                                                       expert, 81, 86, 109, 263, 266, 273
                                                       legitimate, 82, 89, 112, 224, 264, 267, 275, 320
P                                                      punishment, 228-229, 322
                                                       referent, 85, 221, 265, 319
parametric estimating, 63, 77, 256, 263                relational, 193, 305
Pareto diagrams, 147, 287                           preassignments, 198, 307
passive risk acceptance, 45, 250                    precedence diagramming method (PDM), 46, 249,
payback period, 3, 13, 19, 25, 28, 31, 34, 234,          250
     237, 239, 242, 243, 244, 245                   predictive life cycles, 156, 160, 174, 187, 226,
PDM (precedence diagramming method), 46, 249,            290, 291, 298, 303, 320
     250                                            PRINCE2, 30, 244
Perform Integrated Change Control process, 140,     probability and impact matrix, 28, 69
     144, 284, 286                                  process analysis, 105, 272
332         procurement documentation - project management process groups



procurement documentation, 103, 126, 177, 271,        Project Integration Management Knowledge Area,
     279, 299                                              184, 213, 217, 302, 315, 317
procurement negotiation, 101, 107, 270, 273           project life cycles, 10, 201, 236, 309
procurement statement of work (SOW), 73, 103,            Agile project management, 27, 242
     261, 271                                                benefits, 226, 320
procurements                                                 characteristics, 173, 177, 297, 299
   agreements, 203, 310                                      common roles, 165, 294
   closing                                                   implementation strategy, 168, 295
       administrative activities, 183, 301                   product owners, 27, 243
       closed procurements output, 129, 163, 172,            scrum masters, 243
            280, 293, 297                                    servant leadership approach, 158, 166,
       closure activities, 187, 303                                291, 294
       post-closure step, 187, 303                       common characteristics, 161, 292
       project management process, 188, 303              hybrid, 171, 296
       step after final deliverable, 173, 297            incremental, 14, 175, 178-179, 238,
   Conduct Procurements process, 92, 268                       298, 299
       inputs, 103, 271                                  iterative life cycles, 33, 182, 244, 301
       tools and techniques, 200, 308                        characteristics, 162, 292
   conflicts of interest, 177, 178, 179, 186, 299,           goals, 162, 292
         300, 302                                            timeboxing in, 184-185, 302
   Control Procurements process, 127, 132, 147,          predictive, 156, 160, 174, 187, 226, 290, 291,
         280, 281, 287                                         298, 303, 320
       closed procurements output, 129, 155, 163,     project management information system (PMIS),
            172, 280, 290, 293, 297                        80, 113, 263, 275
       closing procurements, 188, 303                 Project Management Institute (PMI), 36, 246
       outputs, 124, 278                              project management knowledge base, 90, 104,
       tools and techniques, 122, 172, 213, 277,           267, 272
            297, 315                                  project management offices (PMOs)
   lessons learned, 181, 300                             directive, 21, 240
   Plan Procurement Management process, 72,              phase sequencing, 6, 235
         76, 191, 261, 262, 304                          support provided by, 14, 238
   Project Procurement Management Knowledge              supportive, 28-29, 243
         Area, 90, 267                                   types, 4, 234
product analysis, 57, 254                             project management plan, 47, 58, 59, 97, 151,
product owners, Agile methodology, 27, 243                 251, 255, 289
product reviews, 151, 289                                acquiring and managing project resources,
product scope, 50, 51, 54, 252, 253                            104, 271
product verification, 161, 292                           baselining, 196, 307
progressive elaboration, 27, 38, 242, 243                changes to, 46, 134, 252, 278, 282
project charter                                          communications plan, 50, 252
   Close Project or Phase process, 168, 295              corrective actions, 99, 270
   Develop Project Charter process, 200, 309             as project baseline, 97, 269
   as feasibility study result, 25, 242                  purpose, 77, 232, 263, 323
   information included, 32, 244                         releasing project resources, 177, 299
   inputs, 12, 237                                       stakeholder alignment, 214, 316
   preassignments, 198, 307                           project management process groups
   significance of, 8, 10, 235, 236                      Closing, 157, 161, 168, 175, 179, 180, 292,
   tools and techniques, 22-23, 241                            295, 298, 300
project communications, 203, 310                         Executing, 5, 84, 86, 89, 97, 234, 265, 266,
   as input to Close Project or Phase process, 171,            269, 270, 308, 309
         296                                             Initiating process group, 3, 9, 12, 193, 234,
Project Communications Management Knowledge                    236, 237, 305
     Area, 23, 241                                       Monitoring and Controlling, 122, 123, 142,
Project Cost Management Knowledge Area, 16,                    201, 202, 277, 285, 309
     239                                                 Planning, 5, 15, 234, 238
                                     project managers - RDS (role delineation study)                      333



project managers                                            Control Scope process, 128, 199, 215, 280,
   best practices, applying, 201, 309                             308, 316
   delayed projects, 162, 292                                   activities, 217, 317
   following laws and regulations, 161, 292                     tools and techniques, 141, 285
   general management skills, 10, 236                       Create WBS process, 66, 77, 210, 257, 263, 313
   misrepresenting qualifications, 159, 291                 Define Scope process, 44, 250
   process group likely skipped by, 169, 295                Plan Scope Management process, 47, 251
   processes responsible for, 7, 23, 34, 235, 241, 245      Validate Scope process, 119, 122, 184, 276,
   skill sets, 10-11, 236                                         277, 302
   time spent communicating, 5, 234                             acceptance of work results, 139, 175, 284, 298
project objectives, 47, 51-52, 251, 252                         inspection, 128, 280
project phases, collective, term for, 10, 236                   outputs, 123, 278
Project Procurement Management Knowledge                        premature project closures, 133, 282
     Area, 90, 267                                              primary concern, 144-145, 286
Project Resource Management Knowledge Area,                     purpose, 223, 319
     16, 50, 239, 252                                           tools and techniques, 119, 276
   Acquire Resources process, 91, 203, 267, 310          project scope statement, 43, 44, 49, 199, 249, 251,
       enterprise environmental factors, 82, 88,              283, 307
             106, 264, 266, 272                          project selection methods, 17, 239
       inputs, 114, 275                                  project sponsors, 16, 20, 22, 35, 36, 37, 38, 239,
       organizational process assets, 93, 268                 240, 241, 246, 247
       outputs, 97, 269                                  Project Stakeholder Management Knowledge
       tools and techniques, 100, 270                         Area, 18, 20, 24, 35, 239, 240, 241, 245
   Control Resources process, 127, 196, 279, 306         project-based organizations, 210, 313
   Develop Team process, 84, 96, 102, 265, 269, 271      project-oriented organizations, 7, 168, 210, 235,
       outputs, 114, 274                                      295, 313
       purpose, 85, 196, 265, 306                           contract project managers, 168, 295
       tools and techniques, 80, 263                     proposal evaluation techniques, 83, 88, 96, 264,
   Estimate Activity Resources process, 53, 195,              266, 269
         253, 306                                        prototypes, 195, 306
   Manage Team process, 107, 230, 273, 322               punishment power, 228-229, 322
       inputs, 113, 275                                  push communication, 59, 255
       outputs, 211, 314
       primary concern, 116, 276
       tools and techniques, 115, 276
   Plan Resource Management process, 10, 47,
                                                         Q
         236, 241, 251                                   qualitative risk analysis, 49, 53, 71, 252, 253, 261
Project Schedule Management Knowledge Area               quality assurance
   Control Schedule process, 128-129, 280                   primary concern, 94, 268
       outputs, 134, 282                                    responsibility for, 89, 91, 266, 267
       purpose, 130, 281                                    synonym for, 102, 271
       tools and techniques, 137, 148, 197, 283,         quality audits, 87, 99, 102-103, 116, 202, 266,
             288, 307                                         270, 271, 276, 310
   Define Activities process, 50-51, 64,                 quality management plan, 144, 286
         252, 257                                        quality reports, 92, 268
   Develop Schedule process, 55, 197, 254, 255,          quantitative risk analysis, 49, 54, 71, 204, 252,
         280, 307                                             253, 261, 310
   Estimate Activity Durations process
       analogous estimating, 47, 53, 58, 73, 251,
             253, 254, 261
       tools and techniques, 53, 253
                                                         R
   Sequence Activities process, 236, 253, 280, 311       RACI charts, 26, 75, 77, 262
Project Scope Management Knowledge Area, 14,             RAM (resource assignment matrix), 74, 75, 262
     207, 238, 312                                       raw observations, 81, 264
   Collect Requirements process, 77, 263                 RDS (role delineation study), 112, 170, 274, 296
334           recognition and rewards - stages of team development



recognition and rewards, 80, 102, 263, 271
reconcile, conflict management technique, 194, 305         S
referent power, 85, 88, 221, 265, 266, 319
                                                           salience model, 13, 238
regression analysis, 163, 293
                                                           scatter diagrams, 148, 288
relational power, 193, 305
                                                           schedule baseline, 130, 139, 258, 281, 284
requirements, 45, 250
                                                           schedule compression techniques, 60, 205, 255,
    Collect Requirements process, 77, 263
                                                                 311
    vs. deliverables, 51, 252
                                                               crashing, 205, 218, 255, 297, 311, 317
    functional requirements, 49, 255
                                                           schedule management plan, 58, 60, 255, 256
    funding requirements, 67, 258
                                                           schedule network analysis, 60, 255
    requirements traceability matrix, 74, 262
                                                           schedule revisions, 137, 283
requisition stage, Project Procurement
                                                           schedule variance (SV), 120, 129, 135, 190, 276,
      Management contract phase, 90, 267
                                                                 280, 282, 285, 289, 304
reserve analysis, 140, 149, 284, 288
                                                           scope
resource assignment matrix (RAM), 74, 75, 262
                                                               changes, 128, 280
resource calendars, 53, 56, 95, 253, 254, 268
                                                               Control Scope process, 128, 199, 215, 280,
resource leveling, 55, 254
resource management plan, 45, 104, 156, 191,                         308, 316
      209, 250, 271, 290, 304, 313                                 activities, 217, 317
respect, 156, 169, 172, 187, 208, 290, 295, 296,                   tools and techniques, 141, 285
      297, 303, 313                                            Define Scope process, 44, 250
responsibility, 88, 158, 165, 174, 176, 179, 180,              Plan Scope Management process, 47, 251
      183, 266, 291, 293, 298, 299, 300, 301                   Project Scope Management Knowledge Area,
rewards and recognition, 80, 102, 263, 271                           14, 207, 238, 312
risk                                                           Validate Scope process, 119, 122, 184, 276, 277, 302
    individual project risks, 200, 207, 309, 312                   acceptance of work results, 139, 175, 284, 298
    Identify Risks process, 71, 220, 261, 318                      inspection, 128, 280
    Implement Risk Responses process, 97, 133,                     outputs, 123, 278
         269, 282                                                  premature project closures, 133, 282
    individual project risks, 49, 63, 200, 207, 252,               primary concern, 144-145, 286
         256, 257, 309, 312                                        purpose, 223, 319
    low-priority risks, 58, 254                                    tools and techniques, 119, 276
    Monitor Risks process, 125, 132, 133, 150,             scope baseline, 215, 218, 316, 317
         191, 279, 281, 282, 288, 304                      scope creep, 135, 136, 199, 282, 283, 317, 320
    Perform Qualitative Risk Analysis process, 49,         scope management plan, 199, 250, 251, 308
         71, 252, 261                                      scope of programs, 224, 320
    Perform Quantitative Risk Analysis, 54, 69,            screening systems, 85, 265
         253, 258                                          scrum masters, 243
    Plan Risk Management process, 44, 249                  self-actualization, Hierarchy of Needs, 104, 112,
risk analysis                                                    271, 275
    qualitative risk analysis, 49, 53, 71, 252, 253, 261   seller invoices, 152, 289
    quantitative risk analysis, 49, 54, 71, 204,           seller proposals, 223, 319
         252, 253, 261, 310                                seller rating systems, 85, 265
risk audits, 143, 149, 285, 288                            Sequence Activities process, 236, 253, 280, 311
risk management plan, 52, 216, 253, 316                    servant leadership approach, 158, 166, 291, 294
risk probability, 38, 69, 71, 247, 258, 261                Shewhart, Walter, 65, 211, 257, 314
risk register, 47, 100, 219, 250, 270, 317                 Situational Leadership Theory, 225, 320
risk reports, 220, 318                                     smoothing, conflict-resolution technique, 98, 269
risk responses, 150, 288                                   social need, 37, 107, 246, 273
    active acceptance, 76, 262                             solicitation stage, contract life cycle, 80, 263
    fallback plans, 74, 262                                SPI, 121, 141, 150, 201, 277, 284, 285, 288, 309
    passive acceptance, 45, 250                            sponsors. See project sponsors
    transfer, 43, 197, 249, 307                            sprint retrospective meetings, 32, 244
risk reviews, 126, 133, 279, 282                           sprints, 26, 31, 242, 244
role delineation study (RDS), 112, 170, 274, 296           stage gate, 241
root-cause analysis, 224, 320                              stages of team development, 90, 222, 267, 302,
rough order of magnitude, 228, 321                               312, 318, 319, 320
                                                   stakeholders - tools and techniques                 335



    adjourning, 104, 106, 272, 302                             forming, 208, 312
    forming, 208, 312                                          norming, 105, 272
    norming, 105, 272                                          performing, 94-95, 220, 267, 318
    performing, 94-95, 220, 318                                storming, 91, 224, 266, 267, 320
    storming, 91, 224, 266, 267, 320                        Develop Team process, 84, 96, 102, 265, 269,
stakeholders                                                     271
    conflicts of interest, 30, 38, 244, 247                    outputs, 114, 274
    evaluating interest/influence, 9, 236                      purpose, 85, 196, 265, 306
    greatest influence of, 165, 293                            tools and techniques, 80, 263
    Identify Stakeholders process, 3, 9, 234, 236           Manage Team process, 107, 230, 273, 322
        enterprise environmental factors, 12, 237              inputs, 113, 275
        tools and techniques, 4, 220, 234, 318                 outputs, 211, 314
    lines of communication formula, 53, 56, 253, 254           primary concern, 116, 276
    Manage Stakeholder Engagement process                      tools and techniques, 115, 276
        outputs, 87, 109, 266, 273                          team-building workshops, 106, 272
        tools and techniques, 93, 268                   technical assessment board, 279
    Monitor Stakeholder Engagement process,             technical performance analysis, 130, 281, 304
          119, 122, 126, 276, 279                       technical review board, 279
        benefits, 202, 310                              technological advance, 29, 243
        outputs, 151, 289                               Theory X, 108, 231, 273, 323
        tools and techniques, 128, 280                  Theory Y, 95, 109, 229, 268, 273, 322
    Plan Stakeholder Engagement process, 60,            Theory Z, 103, 228, 271, 321
          64-65, 68, 256, 257, 258                      three-point estimating, 60, 65, 255, 267
    Project Stakeholder Management Knowledge            tight matrix, 85, 204, 265, 310
          Area, 18, 20, 24, 35, 239, 240, 241, 245      to-complete performance index (TCPI), 124, 138,
    satisfaction, measuring, 160, 292                         197, 277, 278, 283, 307
    stakeholder analysis, 13, 236, 238                      targeting BAC, 209, 283, 285, 313
    stakeholder engagement assessment matrix,               targeting EAC, 146, 278, 285, 286
          147, 255, 287, 289                            tolerable results, 144, 286
    stakeholder engagement plan, 86, 214, 227,          tools and techniques
          265, 316, 321                                     Acquire Resources process, 100, 270
starvation, as cause of project closure, 156, 159,          Close Project or Phase process, 183, 301
      163, 180, 290, 291, 293, 300                          Conduct Procurements process, 200, 308
statistical sampling, 230, 231, 322, 323                    Control Costs process, 124-125, 127, 278,
status reports, 133, 282                                         279
status review meetings, 114, 142, 146, 275, 285, 287        Control Procurements process, 122, 213, 277,
status updates, 215, 316                                         315
storming stage of team development, 87, 91, 224,            Control Quality process, 129, 148, 280, 288
      266, 267, 320                                         Control Schedule process, 137, 148, 197, 283,
strategic opportunities, 232, 323                                288, 307
success criteria, 32, 244                                   Control Scope process, 141, 285
supportive PMOs (project management offices),               Develop Project Management Plan process,
      28-29, 243                                                 41, 247
SV. See schedule variance                                   Develop Team process, 80, 263
                                                            Direct and Manage Project Work process, 190,
                                                                 191, 304
T                                                           Estimate Activity Durations process, 53, 253
                                                            Estimate Costs process, 65, 257
T-Type diagrams, 100, 270                                   Identify Stakeholders process, 4, 220, 234, 318
tacit knowledge, 111, 227, 274, 275, 311, 321               Manage Project Knowledge process, 192, 304
tailoring, 11, 237                                          Manage Quality process, 95, 268
TCPI. See to-complete performance index                     Manage Stakeholder Engagement process, 93,
team skills, 115, 252, 275, 276                                  268
teams                                                       Manage Team process, 115, 276
    development stages, 90, 222, 267, 302, 312,             Monitor and Control Project Work process,
         318, 319, 320                                           205, 311
       adjourning, 104, 106, 272, 302                       Monitor Communications process, 131, 281
336         top-down estimating - zero defects practice



    Monitor Stakeholder Engagement process,               responsibility, 88, 158, 165, 174, 176, 179,
          128, 280                                             180, 183, 266, 291, 293, 298, 299, 300,
    Perform Integrated Change Control process,                 301
          120-121, 131, 277, 281                          groups applicable to, 178
    Perform Quantitative Risk Analysis process,           violations by team members, 163, 166, 293,
          69, 258                                              294
    Plan Communications Management process,           variances
          62, 222, 256, 319                               causes, 131, 281
    Plan Quality Management process, 198, 219,            variance analysis, 144, 286
          227, 307, 318, 321                              variance at completion (VAC), 131, 133, 136,
    Plan Risk Management process, 44, 249                      137, 147, 281, 282, 283, 318
    Validate Scope process, 119, 276                  vendors
top-down estimating, 47, 251. See also analogous          rating, 82, 264
      estimating                                          screening systems, 85, 265
total float, 44, 70, 214, 249, 260, 260, 315, 315         vendor agreements, 112, 274
Total Quality Management (TQM), 65, 257               virtual teams, 94, 95, 100, 109, 222, 268, 270,
tracking, 72, 261                                           273, 319
training                                              Vroom, Victor, 89, 267, 272, 307
    diversity training, 100, 270
    on cultural norms, 84, 265
transactional leadership style, 92, 267
transfer risk response, 43, 197, 249, 307             W
transformational leadership style, 82, 264            walk-throughs, 151, 289
trend analysis, 127, 204, 279, 310                    warrant period costs, 64, 257
triangular distribution, 46, 58, 221, 250, 254, 318   watch lists, 58, 254
triple constraints, 162, 292                          WBS. See work breakdown structure (WBS)
Tuckman ladder, 108, 184, 273, 275, 302, 312,         weak matrix organizations, 15, 238
      318, 319, 320                                      disadvantages, 4, 234
                                                         project closeout, 155, 289
                                                         reassigning resources, 181, 300
U                                                        stress, lack of, 170, 295
                                                      weighing system techniques, 82, 264
units of measure, 65, 257                             work breakdown structure (WBS), 44, 65, 249,
                                                           257
                                                         Create WBS process, 66, 77, 210, 257, 263,
V                                                              313
                                                         lowest level, 72, 203, 261, 310
VAC (variance at completion), 131, 133, 136, 137,     work package level, 203, 310
     147, 281, 282, 283, 318                          work performance data, 81, 87, 150, 208, 227,
Validate Scope process, 119, 122, 184, 276, 277,           264, 266, 276, 281, 285, 288,
     302                                                   312, 321
   acceptance of work results, 139, 175, 284, 298     work performance information, 120, 132, 141,
   inspection, 128, 280                                    281, 285
   outputs, 123, 278                                  work performance reports, 136, 152, 281, 283,
   premature project closures, 133, 282                    285, 286, 289, 316
   primary concern, 144-145, 286
   purpose, 223, 319
   tools and techniques, 119, 276
values, 298
                                                      X
   fairness, 162, 180, 183, 186, 222, 292, 300,       X-Type diagrams, 100, 270
         301, 303, 319
   honesty, 157, 159, 164, 169, 186, 187, 290,
         291, 293, 295, 301, 302, 303
   respect, 156, 169, 172, 187, 208, 290, 295,
                                                      Z
         296, 297, 303, 313                           zero defects practice, 254, 321
    WILEY END USER LICENSE
          AGREEMENT
Go to www.wiley.com/go/eula to access Wiley's ebook
EULA.
