Project Management Professional
              Exam PMP


                 Edition 15.0



  (c) 2003- 2004 Test Killer, LTD All Rights Reserved
                                Congratulations!!


You have purchased a Testkiller Ltd. Study Guide.

This study guide is a complete collection of questions that have been directly taken from
the real exams and answers that have been researched and verified by our professional
expert team. Study and memorize the following questions and answers for approximately
15 to 20 hours and you will be prepared to take the exams. We guarantee it!

Remember, average study time is 15 to 20 hours and then you are ready!!!

                                      GOOD LUCK!




                                       DISCLAIMER
This study guide and/or material is not sponsored by, endorsed by or affiliated with
Microsoft, Cisco, Oracle, Citrix, CIW, CheckPoint, Novell, Sun/Solaris, CWNA, LPI,
ISC, etc. All trademarks are properties of their respective owners.




                                         Guarantee
If you use this study guide correctly and still fail the exam, send a scanned copy of your
official score notice at: support@troytec.com

We will gladly refund the cost of this study guide. However, you will not need this
guarantee if you follow the above instructions.




This material is protected by copyright law and international treaties. Unauthorized
reproduction or distribution of this material, or any portion thereof, may result in severe
civil and criminal penalties, and will be prosecuted to the maximum extent possible under
law.
Question 1
You are in process of identifying and documenting the project roles
and responsibilities and create staffing management plan. All of the
following should be addressed when listing the roles and
responsibilities EXCEPT:
    A. Competency
    B. Authority
    C. Responsibility
    D. Compliance
    E. Role

Answer: D

Question 2
Reserve analysis is a tool /technique in all of the following processes
EXCEPT:
  A. Cost budgeting
  B. Activity resource estimation
  C. Risk monitoring and control
  D. Activity duration estimation
  E. Cost estimation

Answer: B

Question 3
Which of the following are NOT outputs of the Activity Duration
Estimation process?
   A. Activity Duration Estimates
   B. Schedule baseline
   C. None of the choices are correct
   D. Updates to activity attribute

Answer: B

Question 4
Which of the following statements are FALSE regarding the project
scope management plan?
   A. The project scope management plan describes how the project
      scope will be defined and managed by the project scope
      management team
   B. The project scope management plan specifies how formal
      verification and acceptance of the project deliverables will be
      satisfied.
   C. The project scope management plan is contained within the
      project management plan.
   D. The project scope management plan identifies the influence and
      interest of the stakeholders and documents their expectations
   E. The project scope management plan is an output of the Scope
      Planning process

Answer: D

Question 5
Which of the following statements are TRUE regarding various Activity
Scheduling tools?
  A. PDM allows for conditional branching and iteration of activities
  B. PDM uses activity-on-node (AON) diagramming method.
  C. PDM allows for conditional branching and iteration of activities
  D. PDM uses analogous methods as an estimation technique.

Answer: B

Question 6
Which of the following can be used to determine what work is included
in each work package for each of your team members?
   A. None of the choices are correct
   B. WBS dictionary
   C. RBS
   D. Project scope statement
   E. Project schedule

Answer: B

Question 7
Which of the following statements are FALSE regarding rolling wave
plan?
   A. Rolling Wave Planning is a phased iterative approach to project
      development
   B. Rolling Wave Planning is a cost and schedule planning technique
      used in the Activity Definition process
   C. Rolling Wave Planning is the process of decomposing each work
      package within the WBS into the corresponding schedule
      activities required to produce the work package deliverables
   D. Rolling Wave Planning describes a form of progressive
      elaboration planning where the work to be performed in the near
      time is planned in detail at a low level of the WBS, while work far
      in future is planned for WBS components that are relatively at a
      high level of WBS.

Answer: C

Question 8
Which of the following statements are FALSE regarding Expected
Monetary Value Analysis (EMV)?
  A. EMV is a statistical concept that calculates the average outcome
     of project outcomes based on various assumptions and
     scenarios.
  B. Decision tree analysis is a type of EMV analysis
  C. EMV is a tool/ technique of Qualitative Risk Analysis
  D. EMV is calculated by multiplying the value of each possible
     outcome by its probability of occurrence, and summing them
     together

Answer: C

Question 9
Which of the following describes a group of elated schedule activities
aggregated at some summary level, displayed reported as a single
activity at summary level?
    A. Work activity
    B. Control account
    C. Planning package
    D. Milestone activity
    E. Hammock activity

Answer: E

Question 10
Which of the following are NOT tools/ techniques of the Activity
Definition Process?
  A. Expert judgment
  B. Decomposition, templates
  C. Rolling wave planning
  D. Planning component
  E. Schedule network templates

Answer: E

Question 11
You are in process of developing an approximation of the costs of
resources needed to complete each schedule activity. Which of the
following is the LEAST helpful input?
    A. WBS, WS dictionary
    B. Market place conditions, commercial databases
    C. Cost estimating policies/ templates, historical information,
       project team knowledge
    D. Schedule management plan, staffing management plan, risk
       register
    E. Activity cost estimates, activity cost estimate supporting detail

Answer: E

Question 12
Planning components are tools/ techniques of the Activity Definition
Process. Which of the following are planning components?
   A. Rolling wave planning, decomposition
   B. Control account, planning package
   C. Milestone list, schedule network templates
   D. Control package, planning account

Answer: B

Question 13
You are in process of numerically analyzing the effects of identified
risks. Which of the following are NOT tools/ techniques you can use in
the process?
   A. Sensitivity analysis
   B. Reserve analysis
   C. Expected monetary value analysis
   D. Modeling and simulation
   E. Decision tree analysis

Answer: B

Question 14
Which of the following describes tool/ technique where expenditure of
funds is reconciled with the funding limits imposed by the performing
organization?
   A. Forecasting
   B. Cost reconciliation
   C. Funding limit reconciliation
   D. Reserve reconciliation
   E. Cost aggregation
Answer: C

Question 15
Which of the following situations will cause schedule activity duration
estimates to directly influence the cost estimates EXCEPT:
   A. When resource cost rate information is unavailable from
      commercial databases
   B. When resources are applied per unit of time of duration of
      schedule activity
   C. When union labor with regularly expiring collective bargaining
      agreements are involve
   D. When seasonal cost variations are involve
   E. When project budget includes interest rate changes

Answer: A

Question 16
Which of the following statements are FALSE regarding cost-
reimbursable contracts?
   A. cost-reimbursable contracts generally carry the highest risks to
      the buyer, as the total costs are uncertain
   B. cost-reimbursable contracts often includes incentives for meeting
      or exceeding project objectives
   C. cost-reimbursable contracts resemble fix unit agreements when
      the unit rates are preset by the buyer and seller
   D. cost-reimbursable contracts are contracts that involves
      payments to the seller for actual costs, plus a fee representing
      the sellers profit

Answer: C

Question 17
You have been hired as a project manager for a small local bank. The
banks wants you to design and develop custom online bill pay software
so that its customers can pay their bills online.
You are ready to begin the activity definition of your project. You have
identifies the scope statement, the WBS, and talked with the SME's. In
addition, for security reason, you have been informed that project
team members must NOT have criminal history with the FICO score of
700 or above. In addition you've requested that the bank purchase the
necessary transaction processing software, although the software is
not yet available. What else do you need before you begin activity
definition?
  A.   Identify   the   historical information on previous projects
  B.   Identify   the   activity attributes
  C.   Identify   the   constraints and assumptions of the project
  D.   Identify   the   activities lists
  E.   Identify   the   milestone list

Answer: A

Question 18
You are the project manager at a software company developing the
next-gen OODBMS (Object Oriented Data Base Management System).
As software development can be very chaotic, your company has
elected to follow a more rigorous approach to software development.
Specifically your company has chosen to adopt the extreme
programming XP methodology for your current software project.
The XP methodology is highly iterative, and produces numerous
deliverables include UML diagrams, architecture diagrams, prototypes
and test-cases.
Assume you are in the Activity Sequencing phase of the project. Which
of the following sequencing methods should you use to identify the
logical relationships between tasks, so that the activities can be
sequenced correctly?
   A. ADM
   B. PDM
   C. GERT
   D. AOA

Answer: C

Question 19
All of the statements regarding control accounts and planning
packages are true EXCEPT:
    A. Control accounts and planning packages are tools / techniques of
       Schedule Development process.
    B. A control account is an assigned WBS level used to monitor cost
       and schedule performance of significant element of work.
    C. Planning packages reflect a future segment of work within a
       control account that has not yet been decomposed into detailed
       work packages.
    D. As work becomes more clearly defined, planning packages are
       converted into work packages.

Answer: A
Question 20
Reverse analysis is a tool/ technique in all of the following processes
EXCEPT:
  A. Risk monitoring and control
  B. Activity resource estimation
  C. Cost estimation
  D. Cost budgeting

Answer: B

Question 21
Your project sponsor has asked you to produce a Risk Management
Plan for your current project. Which of the following best describes
how you should tailor the plan to your project?
   A. The plan must include the predefined risk management policies
      as they relate to the organization
   B. The plan must ensure that the level of details and risk
      management efforts are commensurate with the level of risk and
      importance of the project
   C. The plan must be predefined templates as defined by the
      organization
   D. The plan must include the predefined roles and responsibilities
      as they relate to risk management.

Answer: B

Question 22
You are the project manager at a manufacturer of electronic
components. Your company had been a long time market leader in
electronic components distribution industry. However, in recent years,
the Internet has transformed the competitive landscape. As a result
company's market share has been eroding.
Hence, your current project involves implementing the company's
internet strategies to best exploit these altered dynamics and increase
the company's market share. You commit to completing the project
deliverables by this date. Which of the following BEST describes why
this is the INCORRECT way to estimate the schedule?
   A. A network diagram should have been used to produce the
       estimates.
   B. The estimates should have been created by management.
   C. The estimates should have accounted for the market dynamics
       and timing requirements.
   D. The project sponsor should have been actively involved in
       producing the estimates.
Answer: A

Question 23
Reverse analysis is a tool/ technique in ll of the following processes
EXCEPT:
A. Risk monitoring and control
B. Activity resource estimation
C. Cost estimation
D. Cost budgeting
E. Activity duration estimation

Answer: B

Question 24
Monte Carlo analysis is a form of what type of analysis?
  A. Critical path method
  B. Schedule compression
  C. What-if scenario analysis
  D. Resource-leveling
  E. Critical chain method

Answer: C

Question 25
You have been hired as a project manager for a small local bank. The
bank wants you to design and develop custom online bill pay software
so that its customers can pay their bills online. You are ready to begin
the Activity Resource Estimation process for your project. Which of the
following would you NOT consider when developing the activity
resource requirements document?
    A. Resource availability
    B. Project management plan
    C. Resource breakdown structure
    D. Activity list
    E. Activity attributes


Answer: C

Question 26
A project schedule can be presented in various formats. All of the
following are valid formats of the project schedule EXCEPT:
    A. Activity-on-node diagram
  B.   Logic bar chart
  C.   Time-scaled schedule network diagram
  D.   Milestone charts
  E.   Flow charts

Answer: E

Question 27
All of the following statements are true regarding the Activity
Sequencing / Activity Duration Estimation process EXCEPT:
    A. Activity duration estimates should specify a single, specific
       duration, and NOT a range of durations
    B. Analogous estimation is a form of expert judgment that is used
       as a tool / technique in activity duration estimation
    C. Precedence diagramming methods are tools/ techniques of
       activity sequencing process
    D. Activity duration estimates are an output of activity duration
       estimates.

Answer: A

Question 28
Your project team has already created the WBS, developed estimates
for the work packages, and sequenced the project activities using the
arrow diagramming method. In addition, your team has applied
resource leveling and schedule compression techniques on the project
schedule. Which actions should be performed NEXT:
   A. Obtain approval of schedule
   B. Decompose the work packages into smaller components called
      schedule activities
   C. Develop activity resource requirements
   D. Initiate schedule change control
   E. Obtain acceptance of completed project scope

Answer: A

Question 29
You are the project manager responsible for developing a new hybrid
engine for a major auto manufacturer. You are in process of
developing the project schedule. In order to manage the uncertainty
associated with the project schedule, you intend to do the following:
(a) use average task duration estimates; (b) schedule backwards
from the date a project is needed (to ensure work that needs to be
done is done, and it is done only when it is needed; (c) place
aggregate buffers in the project plan to protect the entire project and
the key tasks; and (d) use buffer management to control the plan.
Which of the following BEST describes the technique you are using?
   A. Critical chain method
   B. Resource leveling
   C. Decision tree analysis
   D. Monte Carlo analysis
   E. Critical path method

Answer: A

Question 30
Which of the following process involves determining project roles,
responsibilities, and reporting relationships, and develops the staffing
management plan?
   A. Manage project team
   B. Human resource planning
   C. Develop project team
   D. Acquire project team

Answer: B

Question 31
Three-point estimates are based on determining three types of
estimates. Which of the following is NOT one of these estimates?
   A. Most likely
   B. Conservative
   C. Pessimistic
   D. Optimistic

Answer: B

Question 32
Which of the following statements are FALSE regarding project funding
requirements?
   A. Funding requirements are derived from cost baselines
   B. Portions of management reserve can be include in each funding
      step
   C. The total funds required are the cost baseline plus the
      management contingency reserve amount
   D. Funding usually occurs in incremental amounts that are
      continuous, and hence appears as S-shaped curves
   E. Management reserves are not par of the project cost baseline,
      but are included in the budget for the project.
Answer: D

Question 33
Which of the following processes involves allocating cost estimates in
order to establish a cost baseline for measuring project performance?
   A. Cost estimating
   B. Cost control
   C. Activity cost estimating
   D. Cost budgeting

Answer: D

Question 34
Which of the following statements are TRUE regarding various activity
scheduling tools?
   A. ADM allows for conditional branching and iteration of activities
   B. PDM allows for conditional branching and iteration of activities
   C. PDM uses analogous methods as an estimation technique
   D. PDM uses activity-on-node (AON) diagramming methods

Answer: D

Question 35
Which of the following are NOT inputs to the risk identification
process?
   A. Historical information
   B. Risk categories
   C. Risk management plan
   D. Risk thresholds

Answer: D

Question 36
Which of the following are NOT outputs of the activity duration
estimating process?
   A. Updates to activity attributes
   B. None of the choices are correct
   C. Schedule baseline
   D. Activity duration estimates

Answer: C

Question 37
You are in process of identifying and documenting project risks. You
are using various information gathering techniques to identify the
project risks. All of the following are information gathering techniques
EXCEPT:
   A. Diagramming techniques
   B. SWOT analysis
   C. Root cause identification
   D. Delphi techniques
   E. Interviewing

Answer: A

Question 38
Which of the following statements are FALSE regarding Monte Carlo
analysis?
  A. Monte Carlo is used to determine potential project outcomes by
      simulating the project under different scenarios
  B. Monte Carlo analysis used expected value (EV) calculations as
      one of its inputs
  C. Monte Carlo analysis can be used during the Schedule
      Development and Quantitative Risk Analysis process
  D. Monte Carlo is simulation technique that can help quantify risks
      associated with the project

Answer: B

Question 39
You are currently the project manager at rapidly growing retailer of
high-end electronics equipment. You have been tasked with the
project of expanding business. You are currently evaluating opening
retail stores in one of three US-based locations: New York, Seattle,
San Francisco.
You have been told that the San Francisco market has smaller market
potential, but higher probability of success. On the other hand, the
New York market has a larger market potential but lower probability of
success. And the Seattle market is in between. Your project manager
has given you the following forecast. Which of the flowing opportunity
is the BEST choice?
   A.   Either New York or San Francisco
   B.   Seattle
   C.   New York
   D.   San Francisco

Answer: B

Question 40
You are in process of developing an approved project schedule that will
serve as a baseline against which the project can be tracked. Which of
the following is needed in order to complete schedule development?
   A. Requested changes
   B. Performance measurements
   C. Approved change request
   D. Schedule change control systems
   E. Reserves

Answer: E

Question 41
Supporting details for activity cost estimates should include all of the
following EXCEPT:
    A. Range of possible estimates
    B. Description of project scope of work
    C. Documentation of constraints and assumptions
    D. Performance measurements
    E. Documentation of how the estimates were development

Answer: D

Question 42
Which of the following statements regarding WBS is false?
  A. To identify the major deliverables of the project requires
     analyzing the preliminary project scope statement
   B. The work package is the lowest level in the WBS
   C. A WBS from a previous project can often be used as a template
      for a new project
   D. Different deliverables in the WBS can have different levels of
      decomposition
   E. The WBS is an outcome of the Create WBS process

Answer: A

Question 43
Roger works for a manufacturer of automotive engines. He has been
recently assigned to supervise and mange the manufacturing of a new
model of diesel engine. He informs \roger that his new assignment will
be to have 500 units of the new diesel engine manufactured in 60
days. Roger is currently in the process of analyzing activity sequences,
activity durations, and resource requirements in order to develop the
project schedule. Which of the following processed is Roger
performing?
   A. Activity duration estimation
   B. Schedule development
   C. Activity sequencing
   D. Activity duration
   E. Activity resource duration

Answer: B

Question 44
All of the following should be included in the initial staffing
management plan as part of Human Resource planning EXCEPT:
    A. Release criteria, recognition and rewards
    B. Compliance
    C. Work performance information
    D. Safety, training needs
    E. Staff acquisition, timetable

Answer: C

Question 45
You have been recently assigned to provide an accurate project
schedule for a large construction company.
Your lead engineer has given you the following estimates for several
critical path activities. Your stakeholders want you to commit to a
completion date for these critical path activities. Which of the following
statements are true?
  A. There is approx. 68 percent chance that the project will complete
     between 64 days and 78 days.
  B. There is approx. 95 percent chance that the project will complete
     between 64 days and 78 days.
  C. There is approx. 68 percent chance that the project will complete
     between 57 days and 85 days.
  D. There is approx. 99 percent chance that the project will complete
     between 64 days and 78 days.

Answer: A

Question 46
Which of the following are NOT tools/ techniques of the Plan
Contracting Process?
  A. None of the choices are correct
  B. Expert judgment
  C. Screening systems
  D. Standard forms

Answer: C

Question 47
You are in process of defining how to plan and execute the risk
management activities for your project. Which of the following
statements are false?
   A. The output of this process is risk management plan
   B. The inputs to this process includes the project scope statement,
      project management plan, and the risk register
   C. The tools/ techniques of this process are planning meetings and
      analysis
   D. None of the choices are correct

Answer: B

Question 48
You are the project manager responsible for developing a new online
line bill payment system for a utility company. You are expected to
complete the project within the next year. You are currently in the
process of identifying and evaluating a number of risks quantifying
their impacts and identifying their probability of occurrence. You would
like to use a tool that will determine the highest expected value for the
various scenarios. Which of the following tools should you use?
    A. Monte Carlo simulation
    B. Decision tree analysis
    C. Ishikawa diagrams
    D. Critical path method
    E. Risk Data Quality Assessment

Answer: B

Question 49
The CPM calculates the earliest start date, earliest finish date, and
latest finish date for each activity. Which of the following statements
are true regarding the critical path of a project schedule?
   A. The float/slack time is determined by subtracting the early start
       date from the early finish date
   B. Any project activity with the slack time of zero or greater is
       considered a critical path tasks
   C. None of the statements are true
   D. The float/slack time is determined by subtracting the early start
       date from the finish date

Answer: D

Question 50
The risk register is an input to all of the following processes EXCEPT:
  A. Risk response planning
  B. Risk monitoring and control
  C. Risk identification
  D. Qualitative risk analysis
  E. Quantitative risk analysis

Answer: C

Question 51
You are currently in the process of analyzing activity sequences,
duration, resource requirements, and schedule to create the project
schedule. Which of the following are not tools/ techniques you can
use?
  A. Crashing, fast-tracking
  B. Estimating the basis of activity duration by multiplying the
     quantity of work to be performed by the productivity rate.
  C. Reallocating resources from non-critical to critical activities
  D. Calculating theoretical early start/finish dates and late
     start/finish dates by performing a forward pass and backward
     pass analysis on project schedule network paths.
  E. Applying project calendars and resource calendars to identify
     periods when work and resource is available/allowed.

Answer: B

Question 52
Assumptions analysis, checklist analysis, and risk diagramming
techniques are tools/ techniques of which of the following processes?
   A. Risk identification
   B. Qualitative risk analysis
   C. Risk management planning
   D. Quantitative risk analysis
   E. Risk monitoring and control

Answer: A

Question 53
Which of the following statements are FALSE regarding CPM method?
  A. The backward pass is used to calculate the late finish dates and
     late start dates for the uncompleted portions of all network
     activities.
  B. The latest start of the task can be determined by subtracting the
     duration of the task from the latest finish date of task.
  C. The forward pass is used to calculate the early finish dates and
     early start dates for the uncompleted portions of all network
     activities.
  D. The float /slack time is determine by subtracting the early start
     date from the early finish date.

Answer: D

Question 54
Which of the following statements are true regarding funding limit
reconciliation?
   A. None of the choices are correct
   B. Funding limit reconciliation is a schedule network analysis
      technique that modifies the project schedule to account for
      resource limitations.
   C. Funding limit reconciliation is a technique for measuring the
      performance of work and is used to establish the performance
      measurement baseline.
   D. Funding limit reconciliation is used to ensure that the
      expenditure of funds is reconciled with the funding limits
      imposed by the performing organization
   E. Funding limit reconciliation describes that the expected costs
      needed to complete all the remaining work for the project.

Answer: D

Question 55
You have been recently assigned to provide an accurate project
schedule for a large construction company. You are evaluating the
network diagrams for the construction project, and are using backward
pass calculations to construct the schedule.
You are trying to calculate the latest start time for laying the
foundation of building. The expected duration for this task is 180 days.
The task must be completed within 300 days, while the expected
completion is between 220 days. The latest finish date is 270 days.
Based on this information, what is the latest start time of this task?
   A. 270
   B. 90
   C. 220
   D. 300
   E. 180

Answer: B

Question 56
Which of the following best describes resource leveling?
  A. Adding additional resources to the project to compress the
     schedule
  B. Rearranging resources so that a constant number of resources
     are used during each period
  C. Performing activities concurrently
  D. Influencing factors that create schedule changes

Answer: B

Question 57
You are the project manager assigned to install the electrical wiring for
a 20,000 square foot office building that is currently under
construction. You are trying to estimate the costs of this project. You
know from past experience that is costs approximately $3 per square
foot to properly wire and entire building. As your building will be
20,000 square feet you estimate that the project will cost
approximately $60,000. What type of estimating technique did u used?
   A. Bottom-up estimating
   B. ADM
   C. Parametric estimating
   D. Cost-based
   E. Monte-Carlo methods

Answer: C

Question 58
You have been recently hired to be a project manager at a bio-tech
company to develop a new drug to treat pancreatic cancer. The drug
has been under development and clinical testing for past 5 years. The
FDA is currently reviewing the clinical data in order to determine
weather the drug has any serious side effects. If the FDA does NOT
approve the drug, the project will be in trouble. This is an example of
which type of risks?
   A. Organizational risk
   B. Fore majeure risk
   C. Project management risk
   D. External risk
   E. Internal risk

Answer: D

Question 59
Which of the following are NOT used to create the scope baseline for a
project?
   A. Detailed project scope statement
   B. WBS
   C. WBS dictionary
   D. Project scope management plan

Answer: D

Question 60
Which of the following statements are true regarding the procurement
management plan?
   A. The procurement management plan defines the statement of
      work which contains the details of the procurement item/ service
      in specific terms
   B. The procurement management plan explains how multiples
      vendors should be managed
   C. None of the statements are true
   D. The procurement management plan is an output of the plan
      Contracting process

Answer: B

Question 61
You are using three point estimating technique to estimate the
duration of a schedule activity. Which of the following statements are
true given the following data:
Pessimistic: 100 days
Optimistic: 40 days
Most likely: 65 days

Average: 68.33 days
Variance: 151.38
  A. Not enough information is provided
  B. The calculations were performed assuming     a uniform distribution
  C. The calculations were performed assuming     a beta distribution
  D. The calculations were performed assuming     a potential
     distribution
  E. The calculations were performed assuming     a triangular
     distribution

Answer: E

Question 62
You have been recently been assigned to provide an accurate project
schedule for a large construction project. You are evaluating the
network diagram for the construction project.
Your lead engineer has given you following estimates for critical path
activity: 30 days (optimistic), 100 days (pessimistic), and 50 days
(most likely). What is the standard deviation for this activity, assuming
a beta distribution?
   A. 55
   B. 8.33
   C. None of the choices are correct
   D. 11.66
   E. 3.33
Answer: D

Question 63
Which of the following statements regarding Resource Breakdown
structure are true EXCEPT:
   A. The RBS is a structure that relates the organizational breakdown
      structure to WBS to ensure that each work component is
      properly assigned to a responsible person/ team.
   B. The RBS is a hierarchical structure of the identified resources by
      resource category and type
   C. The RBS can contain other resource categories other than
      human resources.
   D. The RBS is useful in tracking project costs, and can be integrated
      with the organization's accounting system
   E. The RBS is an output of the Activity Resource Estimation process

Answer: A

Question 64
You are the project manager for developing a next-generation search
engine for internet. Instead of using simple word or link analysis
methods, your search engine will use a sophisticated algorithm based
on latent semantic indexing. You are in process of creating the
detailed project scope statement. All of the following should be
included in the detailed project scope statement EXCEPT:
   A. Project specification, approval requirements
   B. Project boundaries, project deliverables, project acceptance
      criteria
   C. Activity lists, activity attributes, scope baseline
   D. Constraints/ assumptions, initial defined risks, schedule
      milestone
   E. Und limitations, cost estimates, configuration management
      requirements

Answer: C

Question 65
Which of the following statements regarding WBS are FALSE?
  A. The WBS is deliverable-oriented grouping of project components
     that define the total scope of project
  B. Each item in the WBS is generally assigned a unique identifier
     that can provide a means to track costs and resources
   C. The WBS is used to show which work components have been
      assigned to which organizational units.
   D. The WBS is an output of the Create WBS process

Answer: C

Question 66
Which of the following can be used to display the assigned roles and
responsibilities of project team members?
   A. PDM
   B. AON
   C. GERT
   D. ADM
   E. RAM

Answer: E

Question 67
You are in process of creating the detailed project scope statement. All
of the following are inputs to this process EXCEPT:
   A. Project scope
   B. Organizational project assets
   C. Preliminary project scope statement
   D. Approved change requests
   E. Scope baseline

Answer: E

Question 68
Which of the following statements are FALSE regarding the Resource
Calendar?
   A. The Resource Calendar identifies the quantity of each resource
      available during each availability period.
   B. None of the choices are correct
   C. The Resource Calendar documents working days and non
      working days
   D. The Resource Calendar provides a hierarchal structure of the
      identified resources by resource category and resource type
   E. The Resource Calendar describes the availability, capability, and
      skills of human resources.

Answer: D

Question 69
All of the statements are true regarding Analogous Estimation EXCEPT:
    A. Analogous Estimation is a tool and technique of Activity
       Definition process
    B. Analogous Estimation is a form of expert judgment
    C. Analogous Estimation uses the duration of a similar activity to
       determine duration of current activity
    D. Analogous Estimation is also called top-down estimation

Answer: A

Question 70
You are currently in process of prioritizing risks by their impact and
probability of occurrence. The risk register updates from this process
include all of the following EXCEPT:
   A. Root cause of risks
   B. Low priority risks
   C. Risks group by categories
   D. Risks requiring responses in the near term
   E. Priority list of project risks

Answer: A

Question 71
The WBS is an input to all of the processes EXCEPT:
  A. Scope verification
  B. Cost estimating
  C. Activity definition
  D. Plan purchases and acquisitions
  E. Cost budgeting

Answer: A

Question 72
You are the project manager for a software company that develops
stock analysis software. You have been assigned to assigned to
develop a new technical analysis tool to forecast to price of a stock
given this historical volatility based on Elliot Wave technique. You need
to gather the necessary information to write the project scope
management plan. Which of the following information do you NOT
need as inputs to your current process?
   A. Preliminary project scope statement
   B. Project management plan
   C. Enterprise environmental factors
   D. Project scope statement
   E. Project charter

Answer: D

Question 73
All of the following statements are true regarding the critical path
method EXCEPT:
    A. The critical path method accounts for resource limitations
    B. On a network path, the schedule flexibility is measured by the
       difference between early and late dates
    C. The critical path method performs a forward pass analysis and
       backward pass analysis through the project schedule network
       paths.
    D. Critical paths have either negative or zero total float
    E. The critical path method calculates the theoretical early start and
       finish dates for all schedule activities

Answer: A

Question 74
You are the project manager for a large children's toys manufacturer.
You've been asked to manufacture the latest craze in "Dancing
Widgets" for the upcoming Christmas season. You've been informed
that the company needs at least one month lead time to distribute the
Widgets in order to have the Widgets on retailers shelves for the
Christmas season.
You've been asked to breakdown the costs associated with production.
Which of the following can be categorized as variable costs associated
with the production?
   A. Facilitates overhead
   B. Direct materials and labor
   C. Insurance
   D. Taxes.

Answer: B

Question 75
You are using the three-point estimating technique to estimate the
duration of a schedule activity. You are given the following data:
[Pessimistic=100days] | [optimistic=40days] | [most likely=65 days]
Which of the following statements are true?
  A. The beta distribution gives a more pessimistic and more
     conservative value for the mean compared to the triangular
     distribution
   B. Although the triangular distribution gives a more pessimistic
      value for the mean, it gives an estimate with smaller uncertainty
      compared to the beta distribution
   C. The triangular distribution gives a more optimistic and more
      aggressive value for the duration mean compared to the beta
      distribution.
   D. The beat distribution gives an estimate with smaller uncertainty
      compared to the triangular distribution

Answer: D

Question 76
You are in the process of developing an approximation of the costs of
resources needed to complete each schedule activity. Which of the
following is the LEAST helpful input?
     A. WBS, WBS dictionary
     B. Market place conditions, commercial databases
     C. Cost estimation policies/ templates, historical information,
        project team knowledge
     D. Activity cost estimates, activity cost estimate supporting details
     E. Schedule management plan, staffing management plan, risk
        register

Answer: D

Question 77
You are in process of analyzing the effects of identified risks. Which of
the following is the LEAST helpful input?
   A. Project scope statement
   B. Risk register
   C. Performance reports
   D. Risk management plan
   E. Project cost management plan
   F. Project schedule management plan

Answer: C

Question 78
You are the project manager at an auto manufacturer. Due to the
recent rise in the cost of petroleum, the market demand for hybrid
cars with high fuel efficiency ahs increased. Your company has
identified the multi-billion dollar market opportunity for highly fuel
efficient vehicles.
However, your organization does not have enough resources and
expertise to exploit this opportunity. Hence, your organization has
decided to identify the qualified candidates. Which of the following best
describes the type of strategy you are using to deal with this market
opportunity?
   A. Share
   B. Acceptance
   C. Exploit
   D. Enhance
   E. Avoidance

Answer: C

Question 79
Which of the following statements are FALSE regarding rolling wave
planning?
   A. Rolling wave planning is a form of progressive elaboration
   B. Rolling wave planning is appropriate for life cycle models that
      allow incremental development
   C. Rolling wave planning is a phased iterative approach to project
      development
   D. Rolling wave planning is a tool/ technique of the Activity duration
      process
   E. In Rolling wave planning, detailed estimates are provided for far-
      term tasks

Answer: E

Question 80
Which of the following risks should be classified as a force majeure
risks?
   A. Resource conflicts with other projects
   B. Shifting legal/ regulatory environment
   C. Poor allocation of time and resource
   D. Floods/ hurricanes

Answer: D

Question 81
Which of the following processes involves developing necessary
procedures to mitigate threats to the project from the project risks?
   A. Risk management planning
   B. Risk identification
   C. Risk monitoring and control
   D. Risk response planning

Answer: D

Question 82
Which of the following can be used to determine what work is included
in each work package for each of your team members?
   A. Project schedule
   B. RBS
   C. Project scope statement
   D. None of the choices are correct
   E. WBS dictionary

Answer: E

Question 83
All of the following statements are true regarding Simulation and
Monte Carlo analysis EXCEPT:
    A. The output of simulation is a probability distribution (i.e total
       costs or completion dates)
    B. Modeling and simulation are recommended for use in cost and
       risk analysis because they are more powerful and less subject to
       misuse than EMV analysis
    C. None of the choices are correct
    D. For cost risk analysis, a simulation can use the project WBS or
       cost breakdown structure as its model
    E. Simulation is a technique that computes the project cost or
       schedule over multiple iterations using random values selected
       from distributions of possible costs or duration values.

Answer: C

Question 84
Earned value analysis is a performance reporting tool/ technique.
Which of the following best describes earned value (EV)?
   A. Efficiency indicator to reflect schedule performance of project
   B. Portion of approved cost estimate planned to be spent
   C. Total of costs incurred in performing work activity
   D. Efficiency indicator to reflect cost performance of project
   E. Value of the work completed

Answer: E

Question 85
You are the Chief Technology Officer of a major stock exchange. You
are in charge of a project to reengineer the organization's back office
accounting, billing, and administrative systems. Your project team has
completed all the technical work required for the project and just
scope verification. All of the following are actions you should perform
next EXCEPT:
   A. Collect project records
   B. Document lessons learned
   C. Obtain formal acceptance of project deliverables
   D. Analyze project success or failure

Answer: E

Question 86
Which of the following statements are true regarding project endings?
  A. Integration occurs when a project evolves into ongoing
     operations
  B. None of the choices are correct
  C. Completion occurs when the project end because it was
     completed successfully and accepted by stakeholders
  D. Addition occurs when the resources (personnel, equipment,
     property, etc) of the project are reassigned to other areas within
     the organization or other projects
  E. Extinction occurs when resources are removed from the project,
     such as due to funding/ resource cuts

Answer: B

Question 87
All of the following are inputs to the Close Project process EXCEPT:
    A. Project management plan
    B. Enterprise environmental factors, organizational process assets
    C. Deliverables
    D. Contract documentation
    E. Work performance information
    F. Administrative closure procedure

Answer: F

Question 88
A SPI < 1 indicates which of the following?
   A. Project is ahead of schedule
   B. Project is over budget
   C. Project is under budget
   D. Project is behind schedule

Answer: D

Question 89
Contract documentation is an input to the Contract Closure Process. It
includes all of the following EXCPT:
   A. Payment record
   B. Approved changes requests
   C. Contract closure procedure
   D. Supporting schedules
   E. Warranties
   F. Technical documentation

Answer: C

Question 90
All of the following statements are true EXCEPT:
    A. Project closure documents and project files are outputs of the
       Close Project Process
    B. The formal acceptance documentation formally indicates that the
       customer or sponsor has officially accepted the project
       deliverables
    C. The project closure documents provide formal documentation
       indicating the completion of project and transferring of project
       deliverables to others
    D. The project files consists of documentation resulting for project
       activities, such as the project management plan, scope, cost,
       risk registers, quality baselines
    E. None of the choices are correct

Answer: E

Question 91
Procurements audits are a tool/ technique of which of the following
processes?
   A. Request Seller Responses
   B. Select Sellers
   C. Plan Purchases And Acquisition
   D. Contract Closure
   E. Contract Administration

Answer: D
Question 92
 Performing the administrative closure process includes all of the
following EXCEPT:
    A. Gather lessons learned
    B. Archive project information
    C. Review and approve requested changes
    D. Analyze project success or failure
    E. Collect project records

Answer: C

Question 93
According to the PMI, which of the following best describes "phase
exists"?
   A. Reviews at the conclusion of a project phase to determine
      whether the project should continue
   B. Assignment of additional resources to the project in an attempt
      to decrease the project timeline/ schedule
   C. Process of exceeding the specified project requirements
   D. Schedule compression by starting a new task/ phase prior to
      completing the current project tasks.

Answer: A

Question 94
You are the project manager at a large accounting firm in the United
States. Throughout the year your firm provides both consulting
services and accounting/ auditing services to XYZ Widgets, Inc, a
publicly traded company listed on the New York Stock Exchange.
Currently, your project involves auditing the financial statements of
XYZ Widgets Inc, in preparation for the annual shareholders/ investors
meeting.
While your team is in the midst of project execution, you are informed
that your project is due to new SEC regulations. Specifically, a new
SEC regulation prohibits accounting firms from providing both
consulting services and auditing services to a client, due to potential
conflicts of interest that could arise from such business relationships.
Hence your project is cancelled and your project team consisting of
accountants and auditors are taken off your project and reassigned to
another project. Which of the following type of project ending is this
considered?
   A. Extinction
   B. Starvation
   C. Cancelled
  D. Addition
  E. Integration

Answer: E

Question 95
Which of the following statements are true?
  A. Contract closure and administrative closure   both involve quality
     assurance activities
  B. Contract closure and administrative closure   both involve product
     verification
  C. Contract closure and administrative closure   both involve benefit
     cost analysis
  D. Contract closure and administrative closure   both involve scope
     verification

Answer: B

Question 96
Which of the following are NOT considered formal types of project
ending?
  A. Addition
  B. Cancellation
  C. Integration
  D. Starvation
  E. Extinction

Answer: B

Question 97
You are in process of completing and settling each contract application
to the project or project phase. Which of the following are NOT outputs
of this process?
   A. Deliverable acceptance
   B. Contract file
   C. Closed contracts
   D. Lessons learned documentation
   E. Contract closure procedures

Answer: E

Question 98
All of the following are objectives of a buyer-conducted performance
review EXCEPT:
   A.   Identify   performance successes or failures
   B.   Identify   payment schedules and requests
   C.   Identify   progress with respect to contract statement of work
   D.   Identify   contract non-compliance

Answer: B

Question 99
Your project terminated early due to budget cuts. You' like to
document the current level and completion of your project, even
though your project terminated prematurely. In which of the following
processes would you document the level of work completed for your
project?
    A. Contract Closure
    B. Performance Reporting
    C. Scope Verification
    D. Information Distribution
    E. Manage Stakeholders

Answer: C

Question 100
You are the project manager at a large construction company. Your
company is under a times and materials contract to build a new
shopping center. The estimated cost of project is $5,000,000. The
project sponsor has approved this amount.
However, you earned value calculations indicate that the project will
be completed on time and under budget by 5,000,000. Based on this
calculation your personal profit will decrease by $10,000. Given the
estimated decrease in personal profit, what action should you take?
   A. Continue to bill the customer for the full $5,000,000 as originally
      estimated.
   B. Communicate the projected financial outcome to the project
      sponsor
   C. Pad additional tasks to the projected financial outcome to
      increase the actual project cost
   D. Suggest to the project sponsor that additional features should be
      added in order to leverage the entire project

Answer: B

Question 101
You work as project manager at a beauty products company. One of
the primary product lines is hair-coloring/dye products. Your
company's primary market is currently in the United States. However,
your company is attempting to expand its distribution channels to
Europe, specifically within the countries within the European Union.
Your company has partnered up with several resellers within Europe to
begin distribution of the cosmetic products into various retail channels.
One of your partners has just informed you that one of the restrictions
imposed by the European Union is that hair-care products must NOT
contain any carcinogenic products. However, your dye contains trace
amounts of carcinogens. By U.S. standards, the trace amount of
carcinogens is considered to be safe. What is the appropriate response
to this situation?
    A. Inform the potential resellers and partners that your hair
       coloring products may not comply with the standards imposed
       by European Union, and that you'll request an investigation into
       this issue.
    B. Inform the potential resellers and partners that your product
       formulation is considered trade secret and you are unable to
       disclose the chemical composition of the hair coloring products
       at this time. A full investigation into this issue will be
       undertaken.
    C. Inform the potential resellers and partners that your hair
       coloring product does not comply with the standards imposed by
       the European Union, and that your company will develop a
       special formulation that complies with the standards.
    D. Since the level of carcinogens is assumed to be safe, there is no
       need to inform your resellers and partners regarding this issue.

Answer: C

Question 102
You are currently working on a web development project to develop a
new user-interface for a legacy mainframe banking application. You
are under a Times and Material contract to develop a wed based
interface for this application. You have finished the work 20 hours
earlier than expected. This means that the profit of your company will
decrease. What should you do?
   A. You should tell the customer you'll be adding additional
       requirements to the project in order to meet profit estimates.
   B. You should add activities to the project to increase the number
       of billable hours.
   C. You should inform the customer that your project is complete
   D. You should invoice the customer for the expected billable
       amount, as allowed by the provisions of your contract.
Answer: C

Question 103
You are a contract manager within an information technology
department of a large retailer. You are responsible fro developing a
new ecommerce web-site for the retailer. You are in process of
selecting the vendor who will provide the hardware, including
computer servers and networking equipment. As a project manager,
you are in the Select Sellers process, and have three different vendors
on your qualified sellers list who have responded to your company's
RFP.
One of the vendors remaining on the qualified sellers list is NetComp
Inc. you are an investor of this company. In fact, you own 2% of total
outstanding shares of this company. In order to prevent any
appearance of impropriety, what should you do?
   A. You should automatically disqualify NetComp Inc from qualified
      sellers list
   B. As long as NetComp Inc. is able to respond properly to your
      company's RFP, you do not have to disclose your relationship
      with the company
   C. You should move yourself from the selection process
   D. You should disclose that you are an investor to the company
   E. In order to protect your privacy you only have to disclose your
      relationship with NetComp Inc. if you are directly questioned.

Answer: D

Question 104
Your friend Robert has recently achieved his PMP certification. Prior, to
receiving his PMP, he had worked as a project manager, for various I.T
projects over the past 4 years. Robert is familiar with various
techniques fir I.T quality control and assurance.
However, Robert is currently advertising himself as an expert in quality
control for the manufacturing industry. But you know that the quality
issues and techniques differ greatly between the I.T. industry and the
manufacturing industry. In fact, you know that Robert has never even
used control charts or cause-and-effect diagramming techniques. You
feel that Robert is falsely advertising his credentials and expertise.
How should you respond?
   A. You should talk to Robert to have him stop falsely advertising his
       experience. Let him know you'll report him to the PMI otherwise.
   B. The company that will hire Robert is responsible for performing
       the necessary background checks and due diligence. As a result,
       you are not obligated to take any actions.
   C. You are not responsible for actions of others, and hence, you
      have no obligations to respond
   D. Report Robert to the PMI immediately and recommended to the
      PMI that Robert's PMP credentials be revoked for his egregious
      behavior.
   E. You are not responsible for enforcing and policing truthful
      advertising, and hence are not obligated to respond.

Answer: A

Question 105
Micheal is a self employed PMP certified project manager who is
currently working as a constructor at a company specializing in
developing medical equipment. The company has a policy that
explicitly states that smoking is not allowed during working hours.
However, since Micheal is self-employed and not considered a regular
company employee he decides to smoke during lunch hour. Which of
the following statements are true?
   A. Micheal should not smoke during lunch since he should honor the
      obligations of the community he works in, as discussed in
      Section C1 of the PMI's Member Code of Conduct.
   B. Micheal should not smoke at lunch hours since smoking is
      potentially harmful to others. Micheal has a duty to ensure that
      the public is protected from harm, as discussed in Section C2 of
      the PMI's Member Code of Conduct.
   C. As long as Michael smokes responsibly, he may take the smoke
      during his lunch hour.
   D. Since Micheal is self employed and not regular company
      employee he does not necessarily have to abide by the
      company's policies.
Answer: A

Question 106
Please select which of the following statements is TRUE regarding the
initiating process group?
    A. A project manager should always be identified and assigned
        during the Direct and Manage Project Execution process.
    B. The project has the highest probability of succeeding during the
        initiating phase.
    C. The initiating process group includes the Develop Project Charter
        and Develop Preliminary Project Scope Statement processes
    D. Risk is lowest during the initiating phase.

Answer: C
Question 107
Which of the following is NOT included in the project scope statement?
  A. Product acceptance criteria
  B. Initial cost estimate
  C. Initial defined risks
  D. Stakeholders influences
  E. Schedule milestones

Answer: D

Question 108
Which of the following statement regarding competitive methods,
scoring methods, and cash flow analysis?
   A. There are benefit measurement methods used as tools in the
      initiating process group
   B. There are benefit measurement methods used as inputs to
      initiating process group
   C. There are constrained optimization methods used as inputs to
      initiating process group
   D. There are quantitative risk analysis methods used as inputs to
      the risk identification process
   E. There are constrained optimization methods used as tools in the
      initiating process group


Answer: A

Question 109
Which of the following is not true regarding project charter?
  A. Document that constitute what the project is, what the project
     will deliver, and how all the processes will be managed
  B. Provide the product manager with authority to assign
     organization resources
  C. Provides details on the business justification for the project
  D. None of the choices are correct
  E. Formally authorizes the project

Answer: A

Question 110
Which of the following statements regarding project charter is false?
   A. The project charter describes the business needs for the project,
      such as marketing demands, legal requirements, technological
      advances...
   B. Once the project charter is published, charter may be change or
      revised
   C. The project charter should be published by the manager external
      to the project and not by the project manager
   D. The project charter should include the preliminary scope
      statement for the project
   E. The project charter does not provide the project manager with
      functional power over personal

Answer: D

Question 111
You are the project manager for the information technology division of
the large financial brokerage in the United States. Due to new
regulatory requirements en acted by srbanes-oxely, you have been
assigned to audit all I.T. systems to ensure compliances.
You need to ensure all the data in database is encrypted to ensure
confidentially. You need to ensure that all the users are properly
authenticated. You also need to verify the authorization to confidential
financial information follows the least-privilege principle. This project
came about as a result of which of the following is need?
   A. Costumer request
   B. Risk mitigation
   C. Legal requirements
   D. Technological advance

Answer: C

Question 112
Your work as a project manager at the computer chip manufacturer,
developing*86 micro-processors. As predicted by moore's law each
year your companies introduces new models of micro-processors which
are more faster and powerful then their predecessors. Micro-
processors that are obsolete or do not sell are quickly retired from
production. The lifecycle for the micro-processors begins in R&D,
extends to manufacturing, and finally ends with phase out. This cycle
is often referred to as:
    A. Feedback loop
    B. Product development
    C. Product lifecycle
    D. Project lifecycle
Answer: C

Question 113
Dennis works 4 an international manufacturer of costumer electronics.
He has been recently assigned to supervise and manage the
manufacturing of a new model of flat screen television. His supervisor
congratulates him on the expanded responsibilities and informs dennis
that his new assignment will be indefinitely manage the manufacturing
of this new product line. What of the following describes dennis's new
assignment?
   A. His assignment cannot be considered a project since his
       assignment should be considered on ongoing operation activity.
   B. None of the choice is correct
   C. His assignment can be considered a project since flat screen
       televisions have never been manufactured by the company.
   D. His assignment cannot considered a project or an ongoing
       operation

Answer: A

Question 114
Which of the following best describes the following organizational
structure?




   A. Weak matrix Org
   B. Functional Org
   C. Balanced Matrix Org
  D. Projectized Org
  E. Strong Matrix Org

Answer: C

Question 115
You are the project manager at the Historie Shoppe, a rapidly growing
retail book store selling hard-to-find books and periodicals. Currently
your company is planning on opening additional stores throughout the
United States. Your primary market includes densely populated, major
metropolitan cities.
Your company is deciding among New York and Los Angles. Based on
the following data which project should be recommended using the
discounted cash flow technique?
Projected New York-Make $100,000 in 2 years
Projected Los Angles-Make $110,000 in 3 years
Assume that the cost of capital is 12%

  A.   Project Los Angles since it yields the highest total cash flow
  B.   Project Los Angles since it yields the highest present value
  C.   Project New York since it yields the highest present value
  D.   Both projects will yield the same present value

Answer: C

Question 116
You are the project manager for an information technology division of
a large financial services firm in the United States. Your company
offers a web based trading platform that provides options and futures
trading for U.S commodities markets. Due to the rise in popularity of
futures and options trading, your company has grown rapidly.
To keep up with the demands you have been assigned with the
responsibility of upgrading company's network and computing
infrastructure. You planned to purchase a new high-end mainframe
server. The new server will cost $250,000 and can be used for 10
years. After 2 years the resale value of mainframes will be 100,000.
After 5 years the resale value of server will be 50,000. After 7 years
the resale value of server will be 20,000. After 10 years, the server
will be obsolete.
What is the annual depreciation expense for this server if you use
straight-line depreciation?
    A. 5,000
    B. 10,000
    C. 20,000
   D. 100,000
   E. 25,000

Answer: E

Question 117
You have been recently hired to be a project manager at a bio-tech
company to develop anew drug to treat pancreatic cancer. The project
requires significant coordination across multiple departments from
R&D to manufacturing.
You've attempt to gain the cooperation of chief scientist within the
R&D. however the Chief scientist is focused on completing her to-to-
day tasks, and you do not have any control over her work assignment.
What is the best way to describe her current organizational structure?
   A. Projectized
   B. Balanced Matrix
   C. Strong Matrix
   D. Functional

Answer: D

Question 118
According to PMI, application areas are categories of projects that
have common elements in the majority of projects, but are NOT
necessarily required or applicable to all projects. Applications areas are
not usually defined in terms of:
   A. Deliverables
   B. Functional departments and supporting disciplines
   C. Technical elements
   D. Management specializations
   E. Industry groups

Answer: A

Question 119
You are the project manager at Happy Coffee Cafe, a rapidly growing
franchise selling premium blended coffee. Currently, your company is
planning on opening additional stores throughout Europe. Your
company is evaluating different areas for expansion, including France,
Germany, and England.
You intend to use NPV (net present value) analysis to evaluate which
area provides the best opportunity for expansion. Which of the
following statements are true regarding NPV calculations?
  A. NPV assumes that the cost of capital is based on the LIBOR
     (London Inter Bank Offer Rate)
  B. NPV assumes that the cash inflows are reinvested at the cost of
     capital
  C. NPV is the discounted rate when IRR is equal to zero
  D. NPV is constrained optimization method
  E. NPV is the discount rate when IRR is greater than zero

Answer: B

Question 120
You are the chief technology officer of a major stock exchange in
United States. You have just been provided a preliminary project scope
statement from your project sponsor with regards to reengineering the
organization's back office accounting, billing and administrative
system. Which of the following the BEST NEXT plan of action?
   A. Start documenting the impact of the requested changes
   B. Start establishing and managing project communication channels
   C. Start establishing management plans
   D. Start scope verification
   E. Start performing activities to accomplish project objectives

Answer: C

Question 121
The project charter either directly or by reference to other documents,
should address all of the following EXCEPT:
   A. Project requirements
   B. Project communication channels
   C. Project purpose of justification
   D. Stakeholder influences
   E. Summary milestone schedule

Answer: B

Question 122
Which of the following are NOT inputs to the Develop Project
Charter process?
  A. Enterprise environmental Factors
  B. Organizational Process Assets
  C. Project SOW
  D. Contract
  E. Expert Judgment
Answer: E

Question 123
Which of the following is NOT a tool/ technique of the Develop
preliminary Project Scope Statement process?
  A. PMIS
  B. Project management methodology
  C. Expert judgment
  D. Product analysis

Answer: D

Question 124
You are a project manager in a matrix organization. All of the following
are disadvantages of this type of organization EXCEPT:
   A. Duplicate of job functions
   B. Increased administration overhead
   C. Resource allocation difficulties
   D. Increased potential fro conflict
   E. Multiple bosses for the project teams

Answer: A

Question 125
You are an information security project manager responsible for
securing your cooperate network. Due to new regulations mandated by
the Sarbanes-Oxley act your company's upper management has
tasked you with securing the company's network infrastructure. You
have just completed the Develop Preliminary Project Scope
Statement process. However, upon review you have determined that
the resulting Preliminary Project Scope Statement is ambiguous and
poorly written. A poorly written Preliminary Project Scope Statement
will directly impact all of the following subsequent processes EXCEPT:
   A. Scope verification
   B. Scope planning
   C. Scope definition
   D. Develop project management plan

Answer: A

Question 126
Which of the following is formalized document that authorizes the
project and should be prepared by someone who is external to project,
and should not be directly prepared by the project manager?
   A.   WBS
   B.   Scope statement
   C.   None of the choices are correct
   D.   Project charter
   E.   Production description

Answer: D

Question 127
You are the project manager fro the large children's toy manufacturer.
You have been asked to manufacture the latest craze in "Dancing
Widgets" for upcoming Christmas season. You've been informed that
the company needs at least one month lead time in order to have
Widgets on retailer's shelves for Christmas season. Hence, based on
the current sales forecast you've been asked to deliver 100,000 units
by November 1st at the least.
However four months into the project you've noticed that the project
has become 6 weeks BEHIND schedule. Since missing the deadline in
unacceptable you've hired twenty additional contingent workers to get
the project on track. This is an example of which type of following?
   A. Scope creep
   B. Inadequate project planning
   C. Fast tacking
   D. Crashing the schedule

Answer: D

Question 128
You are the project manager at Day-Old donuts, a rapidly growing
franchise selling premium donuts at discount. Currently your company
is planning on opening additional store throughout United States. Your
primary market includes densely-populated, metropolitan cities. Your
company is evaluating different companies fro evaluation including
New York, San Francisco, and Los Angles. Based on the following data
which project is recommended?
Project New York-
      Initial cost of $250,000
      First year cash flow$ 50,000.
      $25,000 cash flow per quarter after
Project Los Angles-
      Initial cost of $200,000
      First year cash flow$ 50,000.
      $12,500 cash flow per quarter after
Project San Francisco-
      Pay back period of 24 months
   A. Project New York since it has the shortest payback period
   B. Project San Francisco since it has the shortest payback period
   C. Project Los Angles since it has the shortest payback period
   D. Either project Los Angles or project San Francisco since the
      payback periods are the same
   E. Either project New York or project San Francisco since the
      payback periods are the same

Answer: B

Question 129
Project mangers often refer to a project's triple constraints as a
framework for evaluating completing demands. Please select which of
the following describes the triple constraints?
   A. Risks, time cost
   B. Risks, scope, cost
   C. Initiation, planning, controlling
   D. Time, scope, cost

Answer: D

Question 130
Which of the following is not included in project scope statement?
  A. Schedule milestones
  B. Stakeholders influence
  C. Initial defined risks
  D. Product acceptance criteria
  E. Initial cost estimates

Answer: B

Question 131
Please select the correct order for the five project management
process groups?
   A. Initiating, planning, elaboration, controlling and closing
   B. Initiating, executing, planning, monitoring & controlling and
      closing
   C. Planning, initiating, executing, controlling and closing
   D. Initiating, planning, executing, planning & controlling, and
      closing
   E. Feasibility, planning, executing, controlling and closing

Answer: D

Question 132
Which of the following establishes minimum requirements of
performance for one or more evaluation criteria when selecting a
prospective seller?
   A. Independent estimates
   B. Screening systems
   C. Seller rating systems
   D. Weighting systems

Answer: B

Question 133
Which of the following Project Human Resource Management process
is within the Executing process group?
   A. Human Resource planning
   B. Develop Project Team
   C. Acquire Project Team
   D. Manage Project Team

Answer: B, C

Question 134
Which of the following statements are FALSE regarding proposal
Evaluation Techniques?
  A. Proposal Evaluation techniques are tools/ techniques of the
     Request Seller responses process.
  B. None of the choices are correct
  C. Proposal evaluation technique uses a weighting system to
     provide an overall assessment and comparison of all proposals
  D. Proposal evaluation technique can employee a screening system
     and use data from a seller rating system
  E. Proposal Evaluation technique use some expert judgment and
     some form of evaluation criteria

Answer: A

Question 135
You are in the process of directing the performance of planned project
activities and managing the various technical and organizational
interfaces that exist within your project. All of the following are
outputs of this process EXCEPT:
   A. Final product, service or result
   B. Implemented defect repair, work performance information
   C. Requested changes, implemented change request
   D. Deliverables
  E. Implemented corrective actions, implemented preventive actions

Answer: A

Question 136
Which of the following best describes Maslow's theory of motivation?
  A. People are motivated by expectation of positive outcomes
  B. People are motivated by achievement, power and affiliation
  C. People are motivated by hygiene factors
  D. None of the choices are correct
  E. People are motivated by five basic, hierarchal needs

Answer: E

Question 137
You are the project manager working on constructing a suspension
bridge for the city of San Francisco. You've just conducted an earned
value analysis and determined that the CPI index is 1.20 and SPI index
is 1.30. Specifically, your project is coming in ahead of schedule and
under budget.
However, one of your structural engineers informs that he is afraid
that the welding does NOT meet quality standards. Unfortunately,
sub-par quality in the welds could reduce the stability of the bridge,
especially is the earthquake happens. Hence, you are working with the
quality assurance department to verify that whether the project will
satisfy the necessary quality standards. All of the following are
required in order to start this process EXCEPT:
    A. Recommended corrective actions
    B. Work performance information
    C. Quality metrics
    D. Quality control measurements

Answer: A

Question 138
Which of the following statements are TRUE regarding precision versus
accuracy?
   A. Accuracy is consistency that the value of repeated
      measurements have little variance
   B. Precise measurements are accurate
   C. Precision is correctness that the measured value is chose to
      actual value
   D. None of the choices are true
   E. Accurate measurements are precise
Answer: D

Question 139
All of the following are tools/ techniques of Perform Quality Assurance
EXCEPT:
    A. Quality planning tools/ techniques
    B. Process analysis
    C. Quality audits
    D. Quality control tools/ techniques
    E. Reserve analysis

Answer: E

Question 140
Hertzberg proposed that the satisfaction and dis-satisfaction at work
resulted from two different factors "Hygiene" and "Motivation" factors.
Please select which of the following are NOT considered motivation
factors?
   A. Recognition
   B. Achievement
   C. Job security
   D. Job advancement
   E. Responsibility

Answer: C

Question 141
Which of the following are NOT benefits of meeting quality
requirements?
   A. Increased productivity
   B. Less rework
   C. Increase stakeholder satisfaction
   D. None of the choices are correct
   E. Lower costs

Answer: D

Question 142
You are the project manger at a biotech company, where you are
leading a cross-functional team to develop a treatment for diabetes.
The organization has a weak matrix structure, where all of your project
team members report to different functional managers and none of the
team member report to you directly. Your project has extremely high
visibility in the company, and there is a lot of pressure on you to
deliver on time and within budget. However, you are concerned
whether you will have the necessary authority and power to complete
the project deliverables. Which of the following types of powers will be
MOST effective in your situation?
   A. Punishment power
   B. Legitimate power
   C. Expert power
   D. Referent power

Answer: C

Question 143
Which of the following statements are true regarding the
communication process?
  A. None of the statement are true
  B. Receiver is responsible for making sure the information is clear
     and complete
  C. Sender is responsible for making the information clear and
     complete
  D. Sender is responsible for making sure the information is clear
     and complete

Answer: C

Question 144
You are currently the project manager at a consulting company
specializing in developing financial software models. Your company has
been awarded a fixed fee contract to develop a sophisticated portfolio
risk analysis software application for a multi-billion dollar hedge fund.
During project execution, one of your team members delivers one of
the completed risk analysis module to your client. The model uses the
capital asset pricing model and Monte Carlo simulations to determine
the best risk-adjusted returns for the portfolio. Unfortunately, the
buyer refuses the deliverable, stating that the model did not meet he
technical requirements as specified in the contract you have reviewed
the specs, and agree with the buyer's assessment. Which of the
following is the best action to take?
    A. Issue a change order
    B. Complete the original work on fixed fee basis and then negotiate
       a cost reimbursable basis to complete the additional work.
    C. Alter the management plan.
    D. Review the work breakdown structure and WBS dictionary with
       the appropriate team members
  E. Use a stop work order until the discrepancy can be resolved

Answer: D

Question 145
You have just awarded a contract to a outside vendor and developed
the corresponding contract management plan. Which process did you
just complete?
   A. Plan contracting
   B. Select sellers
   C. Plan purchases and acquisitions
   D. Request sellers
   E. Contract administration

Answer: B

Question 146
You are the project manager at a large automaker in Japan. Your
project involves designing the next generation four wheel drive Sports
Utility vehicle for the Asian market.
Your project team is attempting to determine the right combination of
suspension, tires and chassis that will ensure the stability of SUV at
high speeds. Currently, you would like to measure the association
between two vehicles: tire size and overall stability. Which of the
following diagrams can you use?
    A. Gantt chart
    B. Run chart
    C. Control chart
    D. Scatter chart
    E. Pareto diagram

Answer: D

Question 147
All of the following are inputs to the Direct and /manage Execution
process EXCEPT:
    A. Requested changes
    B. Project management plan
    C. Approved corrective actions, preventive actions
    D. Approved change requests, defect repair
    E. Administrative closure

Answer: A
Question 148
The project management execution processes include all of the
following EXCEPT:
    A. Information distribution
    B. Perform quality assurance
    C. Scope verification
    D. Select sellers
    E. Develop project team

Answer: C

Question 149
Which of the following describes the assumptions made by the theory
Y style of management?
   A. People have no ambitions, wants no responsibility, and would
      rather follow than lead
   B. People will be committed to their objectives if rewards are in
      place that address higher needs such as self-fulfillment
   C. People work only for money and security
   D. People can handle responsibility with creativity and ingenuity

Answer: B, D

Question 150
Which of the following statements are false regarding RACI charts?
  A. RACI charts are tools/ techniques of Human Resource Planning
  B. RACI stands for Responsibility, Accountable, Consult and Inform
  C. RACI charts describe the timetable and necessary time frames
     fro project team.
  D. A RACI chart is type of RAM.

Answer: C

Question 151
You are the project manager for an international contract
manufacturing firm with manufacturing plants and offices in India,
China and Thailand. Your company designs and manufactures various
consumer electronics, such as flat-screen television, laptops, and
monitors etc.
Your company is in the process of bidding on a project to manufacture
the next generation the 128-bit video game console for X-Cube
station. As a potential bidding for this project, you worked on the RFP
response and submitting the proposal. The X-Cube Station selection
committee received the RFP responses from all the vendors, and
applied a weighted system in order to make a selection. Which of the
following processes just took place?
    A. Requisition
    B. Contract administration
    C. Request seller responses
    D. Select sellers

Answer: D

Question 152
Which of the following are outputs of the Develop Project team
process?
   A. Project staff assignment, project team dictionary
   B. Reward and recognition systems, performance reports
   C. Organizational charts, staffing management plan
   D. Team performance assessment

Answer: D

Question 153
Which of the following statements re true regarding Bidder
Conferences, and Develop Qualified Sellers List?
  A. They are tool/techniques used to process bid/ proposals in order
     to select one or more qualified sellers
  B. They are the part of Project Monitoring and Controlling process
     group
  C. They are part of Project Planning process group
  D. They are tool/techniques used to obtain responses, such as bids
     and proposals from prospective sellers
  E. They are tools/ techniques used to identify which project
     requirement can be satisfied using external sellers/ vendors

Answer: D

Question 154
Project staff assignments are an output of which process?
   A. Manage Project Team
   B. Develop Project Team
   C. Human Resource Planning
   D. Acquire Project Team

Answer: D

Question 155
All of the following statements are true regarding proposals EXCEPT:
    A. Proposals are seller-prepared documents that describes the
       seller ability to provide requested services
    B. Proposals are considered a formal and legal response/ offer to a
       buyer's request
    C. Proposals are buyer-prepared formal request sent to each seller
       and are the basis upon which the seller prepares a bid
    D. Proposals are output of the Request Seller Response process

Answer: C

Question 156
You are the project manager for a manufacturer of children's toys.
Your project team is in process of designing a new children toy for
next year's Christmas season.
Your team meets and learns about the opportunity, agrees on goals
and resources necessary to tackle the task. Although your team is
highly motivated, they are relatively uninformed of the issues and
objectives of the project. Which of the following stages of Develop
Project Team best describes your team?
   A. Performing
   B. Forming
   C. None of the choices are correct
   D. Storming
   E. Norming

Answer: B

Question 157
You are the project manager for a new software development project.
You are in process of assigning resources to your project using a work
authorization system. Which of the following statements are FALSE?
   A. A work authorization system should balance the value of control
      versus with the control of that control
   B. A work authorization system is used to clarify and initiate work
      for specific activity or work package
   C. A work authorization system is a deliverable-oriented hierarchal
      decomposition of the work to be executed by the project team
   D. A work authorization system is a formal procedure for
      sanctioning project work

Answer: C

Question 158
Which of the following process is involved in making needed
information available to project stakeholders in a timely manner?
   A. Performance reporting
   B. Manage stakeholders
   C. Information distribution
   D. Communications planning

Answer: C

Question 159
Which of the following statements re true regarding Herzberg's
Hygiene theory?
  A. Motivation factors help avoid job dissatisfaction but will NOT lead
     to job satisfaction.
  B. Motivation factors include pay, salary and benefits
  C. None of the choices are correct
  D. Hygiene factors help avoid job dissatisfaction but will not lead to
     job satisfaction
  E. Hygiene factors include achievement, job advancement, and
     recognition

Answer: D

Question 160
You are the project manager for a company that sells online music.
The company is growing so well that the company has outgrown its I.T
infrastructure. In fact, the company's current infrastructure is unable
to handle the terabytes of music download each day.
As a result, the company has decided to outsource its music download
infrastructure to a third party content management vendor. The
content management vendor will host the compressed music files
across its geographically distributed web server farms, and handle all
the logistics with music file downloads and data streaming.
On your qualified sellers list, you have identified one potential vendor
MusikCM. Your procurement department is conducting an independent
estimate of costs of the proposals in order to compare the vendor
prices. However, your procurement department has identified a large
difference between the independent estimate and the proposed vendor
cost. In which process is this taking place?
    A. Select sellers
    B. Plan contracting
    C. Contract administration
    D. Request seller responses
    E. Plan purchases and acquisition
Answer: A

Question 161
All of the following are true regarding change control system EXCEPT:
    A. A change request system tracks the status of change requests
    B. A change control system is a collection of procedures that
       describe how to submit change requests
    C. A change request system has the authority to approve or reject
       requests
    D. A change request system defines the level of authority needed to
       approve changes
    E. A change request system describes the impact of change

Answer: C

Question 162
Which of the following are NOT outputs of the Information Distribution
process?
   A. Project records
   B. Project presentations
   C. Stakeholders notifications
   D. Project reports
   E. Performance reports

Answer: E

Question 163
All of the following statements re true regarding contract negotiation
EXCEPT:
    A. Contract negotiation is a tool/technique of the select sellers
       process
    B. The project manager should be the lead negotiator on the
       contract
    C. For complex procurement situations, contract negotiations can
       be an independent process with inputs and outputs of its own
    D. Contract negotiations clarifies he structure and requirements of
       the contract

Answer: B

Question 164
Which of the following statements regarding quality audits are FALSE:
  A. The objective of quality audit is to identify lessons learned
  B. Quality audits are generally performed after scope verification,
     but can also be performed in parallel with scope verification
  C. Quality audits examines how the project is progressing and
     makes corrections
  D. Quality audits are a structured review of other quality
     management activities

Answer: B

Question 165
All of the following are examples of virtual teams EXCEPT:
    A. Incorporate employees who work from home offices
    B. Add special expertise to project team even though expert resides
       in separate geographic region
    C. Include people with mobility handicaps
    D. Include team of people who work different hours or shifts
    E. Include staff assignments defined in the project charter

Answer: E

Question 166
Which of the following statements are FALSE?
  A. Approved preventive actions are input to the Direct and Manage
     Execution process and consists of documented, authorized
     directions that reduce the probability of negative consequences
     associated with project risks.
  B. Approved preventive actions are input to the Direct and Manage
     Execution process and consists of documented, authorized
     directions required to bring expected future project performance
     into conformance with project plan
  C. None of the statements are false
  D. Approved defect repair are input to the Direct and Manage
     Execution process and consists of documented, authorized
     requests for product correction of a defect found during quality
     inspection
  E. Validated defect repair are input to the Direct and Manage
     Execution process and consists of notification that re-inspected
     repaired items have been either rejected or accepted

Answer: C

Question 167
Which of the following processes is NOT part of Project Human
Resources Management Knowledge Area?
  A.   Acquire Project Team
  B.   Develop Project Team
  C.   Activity Resource Estimation
  D.   Human Resource Planning

Answer: C

Question 168
All of the following are different dimensions of communication EXCEPT:
    A. Precise and accuracy
    B. Vertical and horizontal
    C. Internal and external
    D. Formal and informal
    E. Written and oral

Answer: A

Question 169
Variance analysis, trend analysis, and earned value techniques are:
   A. Quality control tools and techniques
   B. Process analysis techniques
   C. Performance reporting technique
   D. None of the choices are correct
   E. Cost-benefit analysis techniques

Answer: C

Question 170
You are in process of monitoring the various project processes and
their performance. Which of the following is the LEAST appropriate
tool/ technique to use in this process?
   A. Expert judgment
   B. Earned value technique
   C. Inspection
   D. Project management methodology
   E. Project management information systems

Answer: C

Question 171
All of the following statements are true regarding issue logs EXCEPT:
    A. Issue logs are tools/ techniques of the Develop Project Team
       process
  B. Issue logs are tools/ techniques of the Manage Project Team
     process
  C. An issue log is know as action-item log
  D. Issue logs are tools/ techniques of the Manage Stakeholders
     process
  E. An issue log is a tool that can be used to document and monitor
     the resolution of issue

Answer: A

Question 172
Which of the following statements are true regarding random causes
and special causes with respect to statistical Perform Quality Control?
  A. Special causes area result of variance that are always present in
     the process
  B. Random causes are the result of variance that are linked to
     unusual events.
  C. Random causes are controllable at the operational level
  D. Special causes are result of variance that are linked to unusual
     events

Answer: D

Question 173
Which of the following statements are false regarding project risk
management?
  A. Risk monitoring and control- track identified risks, monitor
     residual risks, execute risk response plans
  B. Qualitative risk analysis- prioritize risk by their impact and
     probability of occurrence
  C. Risk management planning- decide how to plan and execute risk
     management activities
  D. None of the choices are correct
  E. Risk response planning- develop actions to identified risks to
     reduce threats

Answer: D

Question 174
Work performance information is an input to Cost Control process. It
includes all of the following EXCEPT:
   A. Estimates to complete schedule activities
   B. Calculate CV, SV, CPI, and SPI values for WBS components
   C. Percent complete of schedule activities
  D. Deliverables that have been completed versus not yet completed
  E. Cost authorized and incurred

Answer: B

Question 175
Which of the following statements are true regarding risk response
audits?
  A. Risk audits are not necessary on small projects
  B. Risk audits should be performed by an outside party
  C. Risk audits consists of performing the contingency plan
  D. Risk audits are unplanned responses to emerging risks that were
      previously unidentified

Answer: B

Question 176
All of the following statements are true regarding decomposition
EXCEPT:
    A. Work should be decomposed to a level where it can be
       realistically estimated
    B. Work should be decomposed to level where it cannot be logically
       subdivided further
    C. Work should be decomposed to a level where it can be
       performed by one person
    D. Work should be decomposed to a level where it can be
       outsourced or contracted out if necessary

Answer: C

Question 177
You are a project manager at a real estate company that develops and
manages commercial, retail and residential properties in South
America, Europe, and Asia. As a company continues to grow, the
company's IT infrastructure is unable to meet business needs of
organization.
Hence you have been assigned to upgrade the company's IT
infrastructure. Specifically, your team has been asked to implement a
corporate general ledger system, improve accounting and real estate
processes, develop a lease tracking system, and implement HR and
payroll systems.
Your project team has already completed all the initiating / project
planning activities and received sign-off/ approvals on the project
charter, project scope, and detailed work packages. Your project team
is in the process of completing all the work packages.
However, you have just received a change request to add additional
reporting functionality to the lease tracking application. Fortunately
you have already determined that this functionality has no side effects
on the components of the "triple constraints". Which of the following is
the BEST action to perform NEXT?
    A. Review the change request with the change control board
    B. Implement the change request as it has little impact to the
       project and it s easy to implement
    C. Review the change request with the project sponsor
    D. Investigate options on how to implement the change requests
       with minimal impact to the project
    E. Evaluate the impact of the change request on the other project
       constraints

Answer: D

Question 178
Integrate Change Control includes the following activities EXCEPT:
   A. Reviewing and approving requested changes
   B. Assessing performance to determine whether any corrective
      actions are necessary
   C. Maintaining the integrity of the baselines by releasing approved
      changes
   D. Influencing the factors that effect change
   E. Reviewing and approving recommended corrective and
      preventive actions

Answer: B

Question 179
You are in process of reviewing all change requests and controlling
changes to deliverables and organizational process assets. All of the
following are outputs of this process EXCEPT:
    A. Project scope statement updates
    B. WBS updates
    C. Approved corrective actions, preventive actions
    D. Approved changed requests, rejected change requests
    E. Project management plan updates

Answer: B

Question 180
Which of the following statements are true?
  A. Changes to product scope and defined in the integrated change
     control plan
  B. Changes to product scope are a result of implementing
     corrective actions
  C. Workaorounds are used to correct problems that occur with
     changes in the project scope.
  D. Changes to the product scope should be reflected in the project
     scope.

Answer: D

Question 181
You are project manager responsible for constructing a new sports
arena for the upcoming Olympics. Construction begins on a project
over a year ago. The stakeholders of the project want a status report
on the performance of the project to date. You've obtained the
following measurements:
BAC=500, ETC=200, PV=500, AC=200, EV=300, CPI=1.5
You believe the type of variances that have occurred on the project to
date are typical expect these variances to continue throughout the
project. Based on the information above, what is the EAC for the
project?
    A. 333.33
    B. a400
    C. 250
    D. 200
    E. 300

Answer: A

Question 182
The Estimate At Completion (EAC) can be used to forecast the most
likely total project cost based upon the current project performance.
Which of the following formulas cannot be used to calculate the EAC?
    A. EAC=AC + ETC
    B. EAC= AC+BAC+PV
    C. EAC= AC+BAC-EV
    D. EAC=(AC+(BAC-EV)/CPI)
    E. EAC=(AC+(VAC-EV)/CPI)

Answer: B, E

Question 183
You are the project manager at a large automaker in Japan. Your
project involves designing the next generation 4-wheel drive Sport
Utility vehicle for the Asian market. A new fuel efficient engine design
is required as part of your project.
Unfortunately, your project team did not have the necessary expertise
to design and manufacture a new fuel-efficient engine. Hence, your
company plans has decided to subcontract all the engine designs to an
outside manufacturer.
You are currently in the Contract Administration process. Which of the
following statements is true regarding the Contract Administration
process?
    A. The tools/ techniques of Contract Administration include contract
       negotiation, weighting systems and independent estimates.
    B. Contract Administration is a Project Management Execution
       process
    C. Contract between the buyer and seller is created during the
       Contract Administration process.
    D. Contract Administration involves ensuring that the seller's
       performance meets the contractual obligations
    E. Contract Administration involves preparing the documents
       needed to support Request sellers Response.

Answer: D

Question 184
Which of the following statement are true regarding the CPI (cost
performance index) measurements?
   A. A CPI less than one indicates that cost performance is better
      than expected
   B. A CPI greater than one indicates that cost performance is better
      than expected
   C. A negative CPI indicates that cost performance is better than
      expected
   D. A positive CPI indicates that cost performance is better than
      expected

Answer: B

Question 185
You are currently the project manager for a software development
project, developing a next generation data-mining tool. Your team is
developing a new software product that will help customers better
manage large volumes of data, especially for data reporting purposes.
The CEO tells you that the project must be completed within 18
months. In order to meat theses strict deadlines you are currently in
the process of estimating the duration of project plan activities,
devising the project schedule, and monitoring and controlling
deviations from the schedule. Which of the following Project
Management Knowledge Areas are you involved in?
   A. Project Integration Management
   B. Project Time Management
   C. Project Scope Management
   D. Project Risk Management
   E. Project Quality Management

Answer: B

Question 186
Which of the following statements BEST describes a work authorization
system?
   A. A work authorization system is used to manage who performs
      each activity
   B. A work authorization system is used to manage the sequence in
      which work is performed
   C. None of the statements is true
   D. A work authorization system is used to manage who performs
      each activity and when activity is performed
   E. A work authorization system is used to manage when each
      activity is performed

Answer: B

Question 187
You are in the process of tracking identified risks, monitoring residual
risks, and executing the risk response plans. Which of the following
tools/ techniques are you LEAST likely to use during this process?
   A. Risk audits
   B. Reserve analysis
   C. Variance and trend analysis
   D. Assumptions analysis
   E. Technical performance measurement

Answer: D

Question 188
All of the following statements are true regarding conflict management
EXCEPT:
   A. When managed properly, conflicts can be healthy and lead to
      increased creativity
   B. Conflicts should be addressed early and usually in private using
      a direct, collaborative approach.
   C. Conflict management is a tool/ techniques of Develop Project
      Team process
   D. Ground rules and group norms reduce the amount of conflict
   E. Source of conflict include scarce resources, scheduling priorities,
      and personal work style.

Answer: C

Question 189
You are the project manager of a company that is building ATM
software for a large bank and financial institutions. You have been told
that the ATM software must meet very stringent quality standards.
Including rigorous auditing of all transactions, ability to recover in case
of software/ hardware errors, and fraud detection and analysis.
In order to ensure that these quality standards are met, you've
invested heavily in proper training of your project staff, instrumented
numerous design review and rigorous performed quality planning.
Which of the following best describes the cost associated with you
project?
   A. Prevention costs
   B. Failure costs
   C. Defect cost
   D. Appraisal cost
   E. Rework cost

Answer: A

Question 190
A Responsibility Assigned Matrix (RAM) can be used for all of the
following EXCEPT:
    A. Identifying critical organizational interfaces
    B. Determine who is accountable for which activity
    C. Track who must review and approve work results
    D. Identifying project Schedules and timelines

Answer: D

Question 191
Which of the following statements are true regarding Project Scope
Management?
   A. None of the statements are true
   B. Scope verification involves developing a detailed project scope
      statement as the basis for future project decisions
   C. Scope control involves creating a project scope management
      plan that documents how the project scope will be defined and
      controlled
   D. Scope planning involves developing the preliminary scope
      statement
   E. Scope definition involves subdividing the major project
      deliverables into smaller more manageable components

Answer: A

Question 192
Configuration management activities included in the integrated change
control process include all of the following EXCEPT:
   A. Configuration monitoring and control
   B. Configuration identification
   C. Configuration status accounting
   D. Configuration verification and auditing

Answer: A

Question 193
You are in the process of controlling changes to project schedule. All of
the following are tools/ techniques of this process EXCEPT:
   A. Schedule control change system
   B. Variance analysis
   C. Performance measurement
   D. Progress reporting
   E. Schedule network analysis

Answer: E

Question 194
One of your friends is a manager at telecommunications company. She
is currently managing a project developing a VoIP (Voice over IP)
gateway that addresses the challenges facing service providers
deploying packer-based voice networks. The gateway offers a
comprehensive approach to implementing high-density carrier-class
voice over packet gateway applications.
The project is going well, except for the large number of changes
being made for the project requirements. The project is fairly complex,
requiring coordination across several different functional departments,
including marketing, manufacturing, engineering, and finance. To help
manage the project, twenty project management processes, were
selected for use during this project. In addition, the project manager is
also a technical expert regarding VoIP applications and is adept at
managing people and communications. Which of the following is the
MOST likely reason why the project is expecting problems?
   A. The functional organizational structure made it difficult for the
      project to be scope correctly
   B. Not enough project management processes were utilized
   C. The project manger did not receive adequate training with
      regards to the organizational culture and environment
   D. Stakeholders were not adequately identified
   E. The project did not receive adequate management support

Answer: D

Question 195
You are currently analyzing the schedule of a project. You have noticed
that for certain critical-path activities in the project, the schedule
completion date of activity versus the actual completion date of the
activities differed significantly. Which of the following statements are
true?
   A. Such schedule variances will impact the schedule
   B. Such schedule variances will not impact the schedule
   C. Such schedule variances may sometimes impact the schedule
   D. Not enough information is provided
   E. Such schedule variances area result of scope changes

Answer: A

Question 196
You are in the process of tracking team member performance,
providing feedback, and coordinating changes to improve project
performance. Which of the following tools/ techniques is LEAST
helpful?
   A. Observation and conservation
   B. Conflict management
   C. Project performance appraisals
   D. Team performance assessment
   E. Issue log

Answer: D

Question 197
You are in process of controlling changes to the project scope. All of
the following are outputs of this process EXCEPT:
   A. Project scope management updates
   B. Scope baseline updates
   C. Project management plan updates
   D. None of the choices are correct
   E. Work break down structure updates

Answer: D

Question 198
You are in process of controlling changes to the project cost baseline.
All of the following are outputs of this process EXCEPT:
    A. WBS updates, WBS dictionary updates
    B. Lessons learned, project management plan updates
    C. Requested changes, recommended corrective actions
    D. Cost estimates updates, cost baseline updates
    E. Performance measurements, forecasted completion

Answer: A

Question 199
You are in process of exterminating which set of project activities will
take the longest to complete. Which of the following is the MOST
appropriate tool to use?
   A. Milestone chart
   B. WBS
   C. RBS
   D. Gantt chart
   E. Network diagram

Answer: E

Question 200
You are a project manager responsible for constructing a new sports
arena in preparation of the upcoming Olympics.
Construction began on the project a year ago. The stakeholder of the
project want a status report on the performance of the project to the
date.
Unfortunately, you are afraid of telling your stakeholders that your
project is coming in over the budget and the cost change is required
using the cost change control system. Which of the following tools
were used to calculate the cost variance projection?
   A.   Performance measurement analysis
   B.   Project management software
   C.   Parametric estimating
   D.   Performance reports
   E.   Computerized tools

Answer: A

Question 201
Ishikawa diagrams are used in which of the following processes?
   A. Perform quality control
   B. Create WBS
   C. Schedule development
   D. Risk management planning

Answer: A

Question 202
You are the Chief Technology Officer of a major stock exchange. You
are in the charge of the project to reengineer the organization's back
office accounting, billing and administrative system. Your project team
is in the process of implementing the technical work required for the
project. However one of the stakeholders for your project is requesting
variance changes to the project. Which of the following is the best
approach to take the beginning of the project in order to manage the
project?
    A. Add contingency reserves into overall project schedule to plan
       for any potential change requests
    B. Contact the stakeholder to dissuade him from submitting un
       necessary change request
    C. Contact the stakeholder's supervisor to request that the
       stakeholder's activities be limited to the agreed upon scope of he
       project
    D. Involve the stakeholder in the project as early as possible


Answer: D

Question 203
Which of the following best describes the conflict resolution technique
that involves problem solving and fact-finding missions in order to
discuss a win-win resolution?
   A. Withdrawal
   B. Forcing
   C. Confrontation
   D. Smoothing
   E. Compromise

Answer: C

Question 204
Which of the following statements regarding configuration
management system is least true?
  A. Configuration management systems establish a method to
     consistently identify and request changes to established
     baselines
  B. Configuration management systems provide mechanisms to
     communicate changes to all stakeholders
  C. Configuration management systems provide mechanisms to
     manage risk and implement risk response activities
  D. Configuration management systems provide opportunities to
     improve project by considering impact of changes


Answer: C

Question 205
Which of he following best describes the risks that still remain after
avoidance , transfer, or mitigation responses have been implemented?
   A. Contingency risks
   B. Tertiary risks
   C. Residual risks
   D. Secondary risks

Answer: C

Question 206
With respect to earned value analysis, which of the following is the
value of work actually completed?
   A. Actual cost(AC)
   B. Planed value(PV)
   C. Cost variance(CV)
   D. Earned value(EV)

Answer: D

Question 207
Which of the following illustrate a chart with upper /lower limits on
which value of some statistical measure for a series of samples are
plotted using sample measure measurement, where the mean and
standard deviation are determine from the sample selected?
   A. Statistical sampling
   B. Gantt chart
   C. Pareto diagram
   D. Scatter diagram
   E. Control chart

Answer: E

Question 208
Which of the following statement are false regarding issue logs?
  A. Issue logs are written logs that document person responsible for
     resolving for specific issue by a target date
  B. Issue logs are tool of manage stakeholders process
  C. Issue logs are tool of manage project team process
  D. Issue logs describes the ground rules and conflict management
     procedures to manage the project

Answer: D

Question 209
Your company is making a strategy shift: form being focused on
fulfilling customer requests for becoming the best cost dairy producer
in industry. Its existing cost manufacturing cost system, however fails
to capture the costs associated with handling special flavors, small
production orders, and complex delivery and order processing options.
Hence you've been assigned to supervise an existing project to
develop a new time-drive, activity-based costing system that will
capture the full complexity of the company's operations and gives
managers new insights into the profitability orders, products, and
customers. Senior management will use the information to enhance
process efficiencies, negotiating new terms with customers, and
attempt to win new business.
You are taking over the project during the planning process group.
Upon reviewing the project charter, you discover that eight individuals
were requiring to sign-off the project charter in order to authorize the
project. Which of the following should cause the MOST concern?
    A. Your ability to yield adequate authority to make resource
        allocation decisions regarding the project
    B. The difficulty in determining who will serve on the change control
        board due to the number of stake holders.
   C. The overhead that is required to notify the large number of
      stakeholders regarding changes that affect the project
   D. The ability to develop adequate cost and scope baseline
   E. The amount of time that will be spent on configuration
      management due to the number of stake holders

Answer: E

Question 210
Product analysis uses which of the following techniques EXCEPT:
   A. Value analysis
   B. Inspection
   C. Product break down
   D. Systems engineering
   E. Functional analysis

Answer: B

Question 211
A poorly defined staffing management plan will LEAST impact:
   A. Human resource planning
   B. Acquire project team
   C. Manage project team
   D. Cost estimating
   E. Develop project team

Answer: A

Question 212
You are the project manager responsible for constructing new 100-unit
apartment in downtown Manhattan. As part of construction project,
you are planning to outsource the electrical wiring of the building to an
outside contracting firm. The contracting firm has requested a
statement of work from you. Which of the following statements are
FALSE regarding the contract SOW?
   A. The SOW contains the objectives of the project
   B. As a buyer, you re required to write SOW
   C. The SOW is an output of the and acquisitions process and an
      input to the plan contracting process
   D. The outside contracting firm requires a SOW to determine they
      have the capabilities to meet the detailed specifications of the
      project

Answer: B
Question 213
Activity cost estimates and its supporting details are output of which
process?
   A. Activity duration estimation
   B. Cost control
   C. Cost estimating
   D. Activity resource estimating
   E. Cost budgeting

Answer: C

Question 214
Which of the following best describes the amount of time one can
delay the start of a task without delaying the start of a successor task?
   A. Lag time
   B. Lead time
   C. None of the choices are correct
   D. Total slack
   E. Free slack

Answer: E

Question 215
You've been hired as a project manager for a local community college.
The community college wants you upgrade the hardware for each of its
web servers, and install the necessary security patches for each web-
server.
You are ready to begin the activity duration estimation process. You
are told that there are total 50 web-servers that need to be upgraded.
From past experience, you know that it takes about two hours to
upgrade the hardware and install patches on each web server.
Therefore, you estimate that it will take approximately 100 hours to
complete this project. Which duration estimation technique did u just
see?
   A. Analogous estimation
   B. Quantitatively based durations
   C. Decomposition
   D. Expert judgment
   E. Reserve time

Answer: B

Question 216
A risk management plan is a subset of the project management plan
and describes how risk management should be performed. All of the
following should be included in the risk management plan EXCEPT:
    A. None of the choices are correct
    B. Budgeting, timing, risk categories
    C. Methodology, roles and responsibilities
    D. P-l matrix, tracking
    E. Stakeholder tolerance, reporting formats

Answer: A

Question 217
You are using the three-point estimating technique to estimate the
duration of a schedule activity. Which of the following is the correct
formula for calculating variance assuming a triangular distribution?
   A. [(optimistic-pessimistic)^2+(most likely-pessimistic)*(most
      likely-optimistic)]/18
   B. ((optimistic-pessimistic)/6)^2
   C. (pessimistic + optimistic + most likely )/3
   D. (pessimistic +4 *(most likely)+ optimistic)/6

Answer: A

Question 218
You are in the process of identifying and documenting the logical
relationships among schedule activities. Which of the following are
NOT inputs to this process?
   A. Project scope statement
   B. Project schedule network diagram
   C. Approved change requests
   D. Activity lists, activity attributes
   E. Milestones list

Answer: B

Question 219
You are in the process of estimating the number of work periods that
will be needed to complete individual schedule activities. All of the
following are tools techniques you can use EXCEPT:
     A. Estimating duration from a previous similar schedule activities
        based upon historical information and expert judgment
     B. Estimation duration by using contingency reserves
     C. Estimating duration by multiplying the quantity of work to be
        performed by productivity rate
   D. Estimating duration by performing a forward pass and backward
      pass analysis through the project schedule network paths
   E. Estimating duration by calculating the average of three duration
      estimates (most likely, optimistic, pessimistic)

Answer: D

Question 220
Which of the following best describes a cost and schedule planning
techniques where details are developed for the near term and general
allocations are made for work far in the future. Detail is developed for
work far in the future as information becomes available to do so.
    A. Milestone lists
    B. Planning components
    C. Schedule network templates
    D. Rolling wave planning
    E. Decomposition

Answer: D

Question 221
You are in the process of defining activities that need to be performed
to develop the necessary project deliverables. Which of the following
are NOT outputs that you will produce during this process?
   A. Milestone list
   B. Planning component
   C. Requested changes
   D. Activity attributes
   E. Activity list

Answer: B

Question 222
All of the following are types of strategies that one can use to deal
with risks with upside opportunity EXCEPT:
    A. Transfer
    B. Enhance
    C. Exploit
    D. Accept
    E. Share

Answer: A

Question 223
You are in the process of estimating the number of work periods that
will be needed to complete individual schedule activities. All of the
following are valuable inputs to this process EXCEPT:
    A. Risk register, activity cost estimates
    B. Historical information, historical reference data
    C. Project schedule network diagrams
    D. Duration estimation databases
    E. Activity resource requirements, resource calendar

Answer: C

Question 224
You are in the process of establishing a total cost baseline for
measuring project performance. Which of the following is the LEAST
helpful tool / technique?
   A. Reserve analysis
   B. Vendor bid analysis
   C. Cost aggregation
   D. Parametric estimation
   E. Funding limit reconciliation

Answer: B

Question 225
In which of the project processes should one determine whether to
obtain products and services from outside the organization?
   A. Plan purchases and acquisition
   B. Schedule development
   C. Activity sequencing
   D. Scope definition
   E. Risk identification

Answer: A

Question 226
Expert judgment is a tool/ technique in all of the following EXCEPT:
  A. Develop project management plan
  B. Develop project charter
  C. Communications planning
  D. Develop preliminary project scope statement
  E. Scope planning

Answer: C
Question 227
You have been recently been assigned to provide an accurate project
schedule for constructing a new 50-story casino, in Las Vegas,
Nevada. You are evaluating the network diagram for the construction
project, and are using the forward pass calculations to construct the
schedule.
You are trying to calculate the earliest start time for laying the
foundation of the building. The expected duration for this task is 150
days. The task must be completed within 300 days, while the expected
completion is within 220 days. The latest finish time is 200 days.
Based on this information, what is the earliest start time of this task?
   A. 50
   B. 300
   C. Not enough information is provided
   D. 150
   E. 200

Answer: C

Question 228
You are the project manager responsible for renovating a 70-year old
office building. You intend to hire an outside construction firm to
seismic retrofit the building in order to make that the building can with
stand large earthquakes. You are in the process of selecting a contract
type best suited for this project. You would like to select a contract
type that transfers the risks onto the seller for any cost risk and non-
performance issues. Which contract type should you choose?
    A. CPPC contracts
    B. CPFF contracts
    C. Cost reimbursable contracts
    D. T&M contracts
    E. Fixed price contracts

Answer: E

Question 229
All of the statements regarding decision tree analysis is true EXCEPT:
    A. Decision tree analysis is a tool/ technique of Quantitative Risk
       Analysis
    B. Decision tree analysis uses EMV analysis
    C. Decision tree is a technique for measuring the performance of a
       work and is used to create the performance measurement
       baseline
   D. EMV is a statistical concept that calculates the average outcome
      of project outcomes based on various assumptions and scenarios
   E. Decision tree is a diagramming technique used to select the best
      course of action in situations where the future outcomes are
      uncertain

Answer: C

Question 230
Qualitative risk analysis requires accurate data as its input. Risk Data
Quality Assessment is a technique to evaluate the degree to which the
data regarding risks would be useful. What is the best course of action
if the Risk Data Quality Assessment for most of the identified risks are
low?
    A. Attempt to gather more accurate data
    B. Re-evaluate the risk data quality assessment
    C. Develop a probability-impact matrix to compensate for the low
       rankings
    D. No further actions are needed, since a low Risk Data Quality
       Assessment is ideal

Answer: A

Question 231
Which of the following are not tools/ techniques that can be used to
create the WBS?
   A. WBS dictionary
   B. Decomposition
   C. None of the choices are correct
   D. Work breakdown structure templates

Answer: A

Question 232
Which of the following statements are true regarding Management
Reserves?
  A. Management Reserves are used to ensure that the expenditure
     of funds is reconciles with the funding limits imposed by the
     performing organization
  B. Management Reserves describes the differences between the
     maximum funding and the end of the cost baseline
  C. Management Reserves are part of the project management plan
     and is usually displayed as a S-Shaped curve.
   D. Management Reserves is a technique for measuring the
      performance of work and is used to establish the performance
      measurement baseline

Answer: B

Question 233
You are currently in the process of prioritizing risks by their impact or
probability of occurrence. Which of following tools/ techniques are
LEAST useful?
   A. Risk categorization
   B. Root cause identification
   C. Risk urgency assessment
   D. Risk data quality assessment
   E. Probability impact matrix

Answer: B

Question 234
All of the following statements regarding Control Accounts are true
EXCEPT:
    A. A control account is an assigned WBS level used to monitor cost
       and schedule performance of significant element of work.
    B. Control accounts are also referred to as cost accounts
    C. None of the choices are correct
    D. A control account is a management control point for cost
       summarization, scope description, and variance analysis and
       reporting.
    E. Each work package/ planning package may be associated with
       only one control account

Answer: C

Question 235
Keeping up with the growth was becoming a problem for a privately
owned Chinese financial services company. Although it easily lured
business from state-owned competitors, low skill levels and weak
accounting systems threaten the company's cash flow. Moreover,
poorly invested assets were delivering inadequate returns.
Hence, you have been assigned over an existing project to upgrade
the IT system to allow for an expansion. Specifically, the IT upgrade
will enable the company to serve more competitors, expand the
product line, gain market share, and win more licenses.
Your project team has already created the WBS, developed estimates
for the work packages, and created the project network diagram.
Which of the following should you perform NEXT?
   A. Implement schedule change control system
   B. Finalize risk management activities
   C. Create the preliminary project schedule
   D. Identify logical relationship among activities
   E. Decompose the work packages into smaller components called
      schedule activities

Answer: C

Question 236
You are in the process of establishing a total cost baseline for
measuring project performance. All of the following are outputs of this
process EXCEPT:
   A. Cost management plan updates
   B. Scope baseline
   C. Activity cost estimates
   D. Project funding requirements
   E. Requested changes

Answer: C

Question 237
You are the project manager for a construction company. Your firm
has been contracted to complete the construction of a 10-story office
building. This project will use three point estimates to calculate the
estimates for activity duration. You have the following estimates for
task A (creating the foundation).
Assuming the triangular distribution what is the average duration
estimate based on the following three point estimates?
Pessimistic= 100 days
Optimistic= 40 days
Most likely=65 days
   A. 66.66
   B. 75
   C. 70
   D. 68.33
   E. 65

Answer: D

Question 238
Which of the following processes is involved with identifying which
quality standards are relevant to the project and devising a plan on
how to meet / satisfy these standards?
  A. Perform quality control
  B. None of the choices are correct
  C. Quality planning
  D. Perform quality assurance

Answer: C

Question 239
Which of the following statement are FALSE regarding the probability
impact matrix technique?
  A. The probability impact matrix specifies combinations of
     probability and impact that rank the risk as high, moderate and
     low priority
  B. Either descriptive terms or numeric rankings can be used to
     assign risk rankings to identified risks.
  C. In the probability impact matrix the probability and impacts of
     each risks are accessed against defined scale, and plotted on a
     two-dimensional grid.
  D. Opportunities and threats should not be evaluated in the same
     matrix concurrently.
  E. An organization can rate a risk separately for each objective (i.e.
     cost, time, scope)

Answer: D

Question 240
You are the project manger at a software company developing the
next-gen web application server. As software development can be very
chaotic, your company has elected to follow the more rigorous
approach to software development. Specifically, your company has
chosen to adopt the Rational Unified Process (RUP) for your current
software project.
The RUP methodology is highly iterative and produces numerous
deliverables include UML diagrams, architecture diagrams, prototypes,
and test-cases. You have just produce the project schedule network
diagram and just updated the project activity list. Which process have
you just finished?
   A. Activity sequencing
   B. Activity duration estimation
   C. Schedule development
   D. Activity definition
Answer: A

Question 241
You are in the process of identifying and documenting the project roles
and responsibilities and create staffing management plan. All of the
following are tools/ techniques you can use EXCEPT:
    A. RBS, OBS
    B. Organizational theory
    C. RAM, RACI
    D. General management skills
    E. Networking

Answer: D

Question 242
You are in the process of painting your house. Since you do not want
to start painting your house prior to rain storm, you check the weather
report to make sure that weather is permitting. Which type of
dependency best describes the relationship between the weather and
your project?
   A. External dependency
   B. Discretionary dependency
   C. Mandatory dependency
   D. None of the choices are correct

Answer: A

Question 243
The risk register is initiated in the Risk Identification process and
further updated in the Qualitative Risk analysis and Quantitative Risk
analysis processes. Which of the following are NOT risk register
updates as part of the Quantitative Risk Analysis process?
   A. Prioritized list of qualified risks
   B. Residual risk that remain after planned responses are executed
   C. Probabilistic analysis of the project
   D. Trends in quantitative risk analysis results
   E. Probability of achieving cost and time objects

Answer: B

Question 244
You are the project manager at Construction Company, assigned to
build 30-storey apartment building. In order to being constructing the
frame of the building, the foundation of the building must be built.
Which of the following relationship types best describes this
dependency between framing and foundation?
   A. Finish-To-Start
   B. Start-To-Start
   C. Finish-To-Finish
   D. Start-To-Finish

Answer: A

Question 245
You are the project manager at a utility company. Due to the recent
rise in the cost of petroleum, your organization is exploring cheaper,
alternative forms of energy. You have just completed the project
Scope Planning process and created the Scope management plan.
However, upon review, you have determined that the resulting project
scope management plan is ambiguous and poorly written. A poorly
written project scope management plan will directly impact all of
the following EXCEPT:
   A. Ability to define, prepare and integrate, all subsidiary plan, into
       the project management plan
   B. Ability to formalize acceptance of the project deliverables
   C. Ability to create a detailed project scope statement as the basis
       for future project decisions.
   D. Ability to control changes to the project scope
   E. Ability to identify the necessary activities that needs to be
       performed to produce project deliverables

Answer: A

Question 246
All of the following are considered schedule network analysis
techniques EXCEPT:
    A. What-if analysis
    B. Critical chain method
    C. Critical path method
    D. Resource leveling
    E. PDM/ ADM

Answer: E

Question 247
Which of the following processes involves determining what resource
and what quantities of each should be used to perform project
activities?
   A. Activity definition
   B. Cost budgeting
   C. Cost estimation
   D. Activity resource estimation
   E. Activity sequencing

Answer: D

Question 248
Which of the following documents generated by the create WBS
process includes a code of account identifier, a statement of work, and
a list of schedule milestones for each WBS component?
    A. WBS
    B. Scope baseline
    C. WBS dictionary
    D. Organizational process assets
    E. WBS templates

Answer: C

Question 249
You are the project manager assigned to construct a new 10-story
office building. You are trying to estimate the costs for this project.
You start by assigning the costs associated with each of the project
activity. Then you sum up all the individual costs into a final cost
estimate. Which type of cost estimation technique did you use?
    A. Analogous estimation
    B. Parametric estimation
    C. Monte Carlo methods
    D. Bottom-up estimation

Answer: D

Question 250
The risk register describes all the identified risks. Which of the
following is NOT included as part of the risk register?
    A. Risk description, category, cause
    B. Risk-related contractual agreements
    C. Proposed responses, owners, current status
    D. Probability of occurrence, impact on objectives
Answer: B

Question 251
You are in the process of estimating the type and quantity of resources
needed to complete individual schedule activities. All of the following
tools/ techniques you can use in this process EXCEPT:
   A. Expert judgment
   B. Reserve analysis
   C. Published estimate data, project management software
   D. Bottom-up estimation
   E. Alternative analysis

Answer: B

Question 252
Which of the following statements regarding WBS are true?
  A. The lowest level in the WBS is called a work activity
  B. The WBS should be organized into a hierarchy that models the
     organizational hierarchy
  C. The WBS is an output of scope definition process
  D. Work not included in the WBS is considered outside the scope of
     the project

Answer: D

Question 253
Which of the following is the MOST valuable result of creating the work
breakdown structure?
   A. Resource requirements
   B. Team buy-in
   C. Activity attributes
   D. Activity list
   E. Schedule baseline

Answer: B

Question 254
With respect to risk management, which of the following statements
are FALSE regarding Decision Tree Analysis?
   A. Decision trees shows the impact of one decision over another
   B. Decision trees are tools/ techniques of quantitative risk analysis
      process
   C. None of the choices are correct
  D. Solving the decision tree indicates which decision yields the
     greatest expected value to the decision maker

Answer: C

Question 255
You are the project manager at an utility company. Due to the recent
rise in the cost of petroleum, your organization is exploring cheaper,
alternates of energy. Your team has just produced the work break
down structure. However, upon review, you discover that the WBS
lacks the necessary details and requires more decomposition. A poorly
defined WBS will directly impact all of the following EXCEPT:
   A. Ability to define what to acquire/ purchase
   B. Ability to establish a total cost baseline to measure project
       performance
   C. Ability to control changes to project scope.
   D. Ability to identify document project roles, responsibilities and
       reporting relationships
   E. Ability to develop estimation of costs of resource required to
       complete project activities

Answer: D

Question 256
All of the following statements are TRUE regarding modeling and
simulation EXCEPT:
    A. Simulation is tool/ technique of Quantitative Risk Analysis
    B. Modeling and simulation are recommended for use in cost and
       risk analysis because they are more powerful and les subject to
       misuse than EMV analysis
    C. Simulation is a technique that computes the project cost or
       schedule over multiple iterations using random value selected
       from distribution of possible costs or duration values
    D. From schedule risk analysis, a simulation can use the ADM
       schedule as its model
    E. Fro risk analysis, a simulation can use the project WBS or cost
       breakdown structure as its model

Answer: D

Question 257
You are in the process of developing an approximation of the costs of
the resources needed to complete each schedule activity. All of the
following are tools/ techniques you can use in this process EXCEPT:
  A. Determine resource cost rate
  B. Cost aggregation
  C. Analogous estimation, bottom-up estimation, parametric
     estimation
  D. Cost of quality, project management software
  E. Vendor bid analysis, reserve analysis

Answer: B

Question 258
You are the project manager for an information technology division of
a large financial services firm in the United States. Your company
offers a web based trading platform that provides options and futures
trading for U.S commodities markets. Due to the rise in popularity of
futures and options trading, your company has grown rapidly.
To keep up with the demands you have been assigned with the
responsibility of upgrading company's network and computing
infrastructure. You have already inspected the existing infrastructure
and are in the process of defining detailed project scope statement for
your project. All of following are tools/ techniques you can use
EXCEPT:
    A. Expert judgment
    B. Product analysis
    C. Stakeholders analysis
    D. Inspection
    E. Alternatives identification

Answer: D

Question 259
You are the project manager for an information technology division of
a large financial services firm in the United States. Your company
offers a web based trading platform that provides options and futures
trading for U.S commodities markets. Due to the rise in popularity of
futures and options trading, your company has grown rapidly.
To keep up with the demands you have been assigned with the
responsibility of upgrading company's network and computing
infrastructure. You have given the project charter progressively
elaborated the requirements, and have just completed the Scope
Definition and Create WBS processes. However while you are in the
activity duration process you realized that certain deliverables are
missing from the scope definition and create WBS processes. What is
your next plan of action?
    A. Include the deliverable as part of activity definition project
   B. Review the WBS to include the missing deliverables, and define
      the relevant appropriate activities
   C. Consult the scope management plan to determine how to revise
      the project scope to include this deliverable
   D. Consult your supervisor as to whether to include this deliverable
      as part of the project

Answer: B

Question 260
You have been recently assigned to provide an accurate project
schedule for constructing a new 50-story casino in Las Vegas, Nevada.
You are evaluating the network diagram for the construction project,
and are in the process of identifying the critical path of the project.
Based on the following diagram, which path is the critical path?




   A.   A-E-F-D-G
   B.   A-B-E-F-D-G
   C.   A-B-G
   D.   A-E-F-G
   E.   A-C-D-G

Answer: A

Question 261
You are the project manager responsible for developing a new hybrid
engine for a major auto manufacturer. You are in the process of
developing the project schedule and would like to access the feasibility
of your project schedule under various different conditions. Which of
the following scheduling techniques is the LEAST appropriate?
   A.   Variance analysis
   B.   Monte Carlo analysis
   C.   What-if scenario analysis
   D.   Simulation

Answer: A

Question 262
Decomposition of project work involves all of the following EXCEPT:
  A. Decomposition upper WBS level into lower level detailed
     components
  B. Structuring and organizing the WBS
  C. Identifying deliverables
  D. Presenting hierarchal depiction of project organization so that
     work packages can be related to performing organizational units
  E. Assigning identification codes to WBS components

Answer: D

Question 263
All of the following are environmental factors that should be
considered during Human Resource Planning EXCEPT:
    A. Interpersonal
    B. Political
    C. Logistics
    D. Organizational, technical
    E. Authority, competency

Answer: E

Question 264
All of the statements are FALSE regarding Resource Calendars?
   A. Project resource calendar identifies the quantity of resource
      available during each activity
   B. Project resource calendar updates are an output of the Activity
      Resource Estimation process
   C. Project Resource Calendar typically identifies resource-specific
      holidays and availability periods
   D. Project resource calendar represent hierarchal structure of the
      identified resources by resource category and type

Answer: D

Question 265
Which of the following statements are true regarding the Risk
Breakdown Structure?
   A. The Risk Breakdown Structure describes the format and content
      of the risk register
   B. The Risk Breakdown Structure represents a hierarchally
      organized representation of identified project risks arranged by
      the magnitude of the risk
   C. The Risk Breakdown Structure identifies all elements of risk
      activities that will be documented and audited
   D. The lowest level of the Risk Breakdown Structure can be used as
      risk checklist

Answer: D

Question 266
Which of the following statements are FALSE regarding sensitivity
analysis?
  A. A tornado diagram is a display of sensitivity analysis
  B. Sensitivity analysis is useful for determining the relative
      importance of variables that have a high degree of uncertainty to
      those that have lower uncertainty
  C. None of the choices are correct
  D. Sensitivity analysis helps determine which risks have the most
      potential impact on the project
  E. Sensitivity analysis examines how variation and uncertainty of
      individual project element impacts of project objective, assuming
      all other project elements re varied concurrently

Answer: E

Question 267
Risk diagramming techniques include all of the following EXCEPT:
   A. Milestone charts
   B. Influence charts
   C. Fishbone diagram
   D. Process flow chart
   E. Cause-and-effect diagram

Answer: A

Question 268
Risk to the project can be categorized by all of the following EXCEPT:
   A. Sources of risk (i.e. using the RBS)
   B. Area of project affected (using the WBS)
  C. Project phase
  D. Common root causes
  E. Quality and reliability of risk data

Answer: E

Question 269
You are the project manager responsible for developing a new hybrid
engine for a major auto manufacturer. You are in the process of
developing the project schedule and would like to identify the project
risks and associated risk response plans. Where would you be able to
retrieve this information?
   A. Activity list
   B. Risk attributes
   C. Organizational process assets
   D. Project scope statement
   E. Project management plan

Answer: E

Question 270
All of the following can be used to estimate the contingency reserves
during Activity Duration Estimation EXCEPT:
    A. Quantitative schedule risk analysis
    B. Dependency determination
    C. Percentage of estimated activity duration
    D. Fixed number of work periods

Answer: B

Question 271
The project scope management plan is an output of which of the
following process?
    A. Scope definition
    B. Scope control
    C. Scope planning
    D. Develop preliminary project scope statement
    E. Scope verification

Answer: C

Question 272
You have been recently assigned to provide an accurate project
schedule for a large construction company. You are evaluating the
network diagram for the construction project.
Your lead engineer has given you the following estimates for several
critical path activity: 30 days (optimistic), 80 days (pessimistic), and
40 days (most likely). Which of the following statements are true,
assuming the beta distribution?
    A. There is approx. 95 percent chance that the activity will
       complete roughly between 36 days and 53 days
    B. There is approx. 95 percent chance that the activity will
       complete roughly between 20 days and 70 days
    C. There is approx. 99 percent chance that the activity will
       complete roughly between 28 days and 61 days
    D. There is approx. 68 percent chance that the activity will
       complete roughly between 36 days and 53 days

Answer: D

Question 273
You are in the process of estimating the type and quantity of resources
needed to complete individual schedule activities. All of the following
are tools/ techniques you can use in this process EXCEPT:
   A. Published estimated data, project management software
   B. Expert judgment
   C. Reserve analysis
   D. Bottom-up estimating
   E. Alternatives analysis

Answer: C

Question 274
Which of the following statements are true regarding estimation
techniques?
   A. Three-point estimating is a method of estimating based on three
      types of estimates: conservative, pessimistic, optimistic
   B. Analogous estimation is an estimating technique that uses
      statistical relationship between historical data and other
      variables to calculate an estimate for activity parameters, such
      as duration and cost
   C. Parametric estimation is an estimating technique that uses the
      historical information from the previous similar activity as the
      basis for forecasting. Analogous estimation is a form of expert
      judgment
  D. Bottom-up estimating is a method of estimating a component of
     work, where the work is decomposed into greater details

Answer: D

Question 275
Which of the following diagramming methods can only use finish-to-
start relationships and may use dummy activities to express logical
relationship between activities?
   A. ADM
   B. CPM
   C. GERT
   D. PDM

Answer: A

Question 276
Which of the following are outputs of the Risk Management Planning
process?
   A. Residual risk
   B. Overall risk planning
   C. Risk management plan
   D. Checklists

Answer: C

Question 277
You are using three point estimating technique to estimate the
estimate of a scheduled activity. Which of the following statement are
true given the following data:
Pessimistic= 100 days
Optimistic= 40 days
Most likely= 65 days
Average =66.6 days
   A. The calculations were performed assuming a exponential
      distribution
   B. Not enough information is provided
   C. The calculations were performed assuming a triangular
      distribution
   D. The calculations were performed assuming a beta distribution
   E. The calculations were performed assuming a UNIFOREM
      distribution

Answer: D
Question 278
You are the project manager at a company developing an online music
store. You are in the process of calculating the cost budget for this
project using a combination of parametric estimation and bottom-up
estimation. Which of the following statements are FALSE:
   A. The cost baseline is considered the expected cost of the project
   B. Projects may have multiple cost baselines to measure different
      aspects of cost performance
   C. The cost baseline is an output of the Cost Estimating process
   D. The cost baseline is used to measure project performance and
      variances

Answer: C

Question 279
Which of the activities have negative slack, given the table below?




  A.   Activity B
  B.   Activity C
  C.   None of the choices are correct
  D.   Activity D
  E.   Activity A

Answer: C

Question 280
Which of the following is LEAST likely to improve the accuracy of cost
estimates produced through parametric cost estimating technique?
   A. When parameters used in the model are quantifiable
   B. When model is scalable
   C. When cost estimates of individual work packages are detailed
      and accurate
   D. When historical information used to develop the model is
      accurate

Answer: C
Question 281
You are in the process project a project schedule for repainted your
house, you first need to scrap off the existing paint, and then add a
layer of primer. The primer provides the paint a better bonding surface
so it sticks to the base material much better. Without priming, drywall
surfaces will soak up more finish paint in some areas than in others,
producing a splotchy effect.
You decided to speed up the process by starting priming before all the
scraping is finished. However once the primer is applied you must wait
until the primer dries before adding on the actual paint. You estimate
that it will take 8 hours for the primary to dry. To correctly sequence
these activities, which of the following should you do?
   A. Add a lead time to the priming task with respect to scraping, and
       lead time to priming task with respect to painting.
   B. Add a lag time to the priming task with respect to scraping, and
       lag time to priming task with respect to painting.
   C. Add a lag time to the priming task with respect to scraping, and
       lead time to priming task with respect to painting.
   D. Add a lead time to the priming task with respect to scraping, and
       lag time to priming task with respect to painting.

Answer: D

Question 282
You are the project manager at a utility company. Due to the recent
rise in the cost of petroleum, your organization is exploring cheaper,
alternative forms of energy. You have just completed the project scope
changes, requested changes, and updates to the project scope
management plan. Which of the following process did you just
complete?
   A. Scope definition
   B. Develop preliminary project scope statement
   C. Scope planning
   D. Scope verification
   E. Develop project management plan

Answer: A

Question 283
Which of the following best describes project funds that are held in
reserve to account for and offset known risks, such as project scope
risks, schedule risks, cost or quality risks?
   A. Contingency reserve
   B. Secondary risk
   C. Residual risk
   D. Contingency plan

Answer: A

Question 284
You are in the process of identifying and documenting project risks.
Which of the following statements are true?
  A. The tools/ techniques of this process include probability and
     impact matrix, risk data quality assessment, risk categorization,
     and risk urgency assessment
  B. The input of this process include the project scope statement,
     risk management plan, and project management plan.
  C. The output of this project is the risk management plan
  D. You are in the Risk Management Planning process

Answer: B

Question 285
Which of the following is the total amount of time that a scheduled
activity may be delayed from its early start date without delaying the
project finish date?
   A. Total float
   B. Average float
   C. None of the choices are correct
   D. Critical float
   E. Free float

Answer: A

Question 286
Which of the following process is involved in developing an
approximation of the costs of the resources needed to complete
project activities?
   A. Cost control
   B. Cost estimation
   C. Activity Resource Estimation
   D. Cost budgeting

Answer: B

Question 287
Which of the following processes involves analyzing activity sequences,
activity duration, and resource requirements, to develop the project
schedule?
   A. Activity sequencing
   B. Schedule development
   C. Scope definition
   D. Activity duration estimation
   E. Activity definition

Answer: B

Question 288
You are involved in monitoring specific project results to determine
whether they comply with relevant quality standards. You are suing
the control chart to illustrate how the process is behaving over time.
You have constructed your control chart and that all data points are
within upper and lower control limits of chart. In addition, seven
consecutive data points re observed, to be on one side of the mean.
Which of the following is your BEST plan of action?
    A. Compare results from the last quality management plan
    B. No additional action is needed, as the process is within control
    C. Adjust the mean based on the observed data points
    D. Identify the special cause variation

Answer: D

Question 289
You are in the process of obtaining the necessary human resource to
complete the project. Which of the following are not the outputs of this
process?
   A. Updates to staffing management planes
   B. Resource availability
   C. Project staff assignments
   D. Roles and responsibilities

Answer: D

Question 290
Which of the following describes an input to the direct and manage
project execution process that consist of documented, authorized
changes to expand or contract the project scope?
   A. Implemented change request
   B. Approved change request
   C. Approved prevention action
   D. Implemented correction action
   E. Implemented prevention action

Answer: B

Question 291
Which of the following statements are true regarding the project
human resource management process?
  A. Human resource planning involves obtaining the human
     resources required to complete the project
  B. None of the statement are true
  C. Develop project team involves improving the competencies of
     team members to enhance performance
  D. Acquire project team involves identifying the documenting the
     project roles and responsibilities

Answer: C

Question 292
Which of the following documents describes the details of the
procurement items in order to allow prospective seller to determine
whether they are capable of providing the products or services?
   A. WBS
   B. Project charter
   C. Procurement management plan
   D. Scope statement
   E. Contract statement of work

Answer: E

Question 293
With respect to the cost of quality which of the following individuals
are responsible for developing the "fitness for use" approach?
   A. Crosby
   B. Juran
   C. Deming
   D. Ishikawa

Answer: B

Question 295
A project manager should exhibit two types of leaderships. These are
transactional and transformational. The leader should guide the
members by identifying their roles and responsibilities for the project.
In addition he should inspire the team members to successfully
complete the project tasks.
If the project manager follows the Mc"Gragor theories of leadership
which of the following statements are true?
    A. Theory Y manager thinks that people are motivated by
       punishments and money
    B. Theory X manager suppose very rigid controls over the people
    C. Theory Y manager thinks that people are interested in
       performing their best
    D. Theory X manager believes that people are creative and
       committed to the goals of the project
Answer: B,C

Question 296
Which of the following tools are used to implementation of approved
change request, corrective actions, and defect repairs?
    A. Benchmarking
    B. Quality audits
    C. Process analysis
    D. Cost benefit analysis
    E. Designs of experiments
Answer: B

Question 297
Project report, project record, and project presentation are outputs of
which of the following process?
   A. Communication planning
   B. Performance report
   C. Information distribution
   D. Manage stakeholders

Answer: C

Question 298
Which of the following conflict resolution techniques describes a
situation where each of the parties involved in the conflict give up
something in order to reach a solution?
    A. Withdrawal
    B. Compromise
    C. Confrontation
    D. Forcing
    E. Smoothing
Answer: B

Question 299
You are in the process of reviewing offers and choosing among
potential sellers. All of the following are tools you can use EXCEPT:
   A. Bidder conferences
   B. Weighting system, screening system
   C. Contract negotiation, seller rating system
   D. Expert judgement
   E. Independent estimates
Answer: A

Question 300
You have just completed the project planning process group and are
ready to begin the project executing process group. You will need no
perform all the following executing process except
   A. Identify potential seller and document product requirement
   B. Improve competencies of team members
   C. Review offers and select sellers
   D. Obtain information, quotations, proposals
   E. Make necessary information available to stakeholders in timely
      manner


Answer: A

Question 301
You are the project manager for the international contract
manufacturing firm with manufacturing the plants and offices in India,
China and Thailand. Your company design and manufacture various
consumer electronics such as flat screen, television, laptop computers,
monitors, e.t.c.
Your company is in the process of bidding on a project to manufacture
the next generation 128-bit video game console for x-cube station. As
a potential bidder for this project your company must register so that
it is on the qualified seller list. Which of the following statements are
true?
    A. The qualified seller list is an input to the select sellers and are
       used to rate and score proposals
    B. The qualified seller list is a tool of the request seller responses
       process and are used to ensure that all the prospective sellers
       have a clear understanding of the requirements
   C. The qualified seller is a tool of a request seller response process
      and provide information about the seller
   D. The request seller list is input to request seller response process
      and are used to ensure that all the prospective sellers have a
      clear understanding of the requirements
   E. The qualified seller list is input to the select seller process and
      provides information about the seller


Answer: E

Question 302
Which of the following statements are true regarding quality planning
and perform quality assurance?
  A. Quality planning is the totality of characteristic of an entity that
     bear on its ability to satisfy stated or implied needs. Quality
     assurance involves evaluating overall project performance to
     ensure that the project will satisfy quality standards.
  B. The quality planning process uses the tool such as benefit costs
     analysis, benchmarking, flow charting, and design of experiment
     and cost of quality.
  C. Quality assurance involves evaluating overall project
     performance to ensure that the project will satisfy quality
     standards.
  D. Quality planning involves evaluating overall project performance
     to ensure that the project will satisfy quality standards

Answer: C

Question 302
You are in the process of reviewing offers and choosing among
potential sellers. All the following are the outputs of process except:
   A. Selected sellers
   B. Contract documentation
   C. Resource availability
   D. Contracts
   E. Contract management plan

Answer: B

Question 303
Which of the following statement are false regarding Delphi's
technique:
   A. Delphi technique can be used to elicit feedback without
      physically assembling the contributors
   B. The Delphi technique helps prevent anyone person from unduly
      influencing the outcome
   C. None of the choices are correct
   D. Delphi technique provides a way to reach the consensus among
      experts and allow the experts to participate anonymously

Answer: D

Question 304
You are in the process of directing the performance of the planed
project activities and managing the various technical and
organizational interfaces that exist within your project. All the
following are actions that you should perform in this stage except:
    A. Collect and document lessons learned
    B. Manage sellers
    C. Manage risks and implement risk reponse activities
    D. Establish and manage communication cannel
    E. Subdivide the major project deliverable into smaller, more
       manageable work packages

Answer: E

Question 305
You are a project manager at a biotech company where you are
responsible for developing treatment for diabetes. You are in functional
organization, where you have little formal authority within the
organization. Which of the following describes the type of power you
have in organization?
   A. Expert power
   B. Referent power
   C. Punishment power
   D. Legitimate power
   E. Coercive power

Answer: B

Question 306
Which of the following are least found to as a part of project?
  A. Roles and responsibilities, pricing and payments
  B. Inflation adjustment, acceptance criteria
  C. Evaluation criteria, change request handling
  D. Warranty, limitation of liability
  E. Statement of work, schedule

Answer: B

Question 307
Which of the following is false regarding recognition and rewards?
  A. Recognition and rewards are tools of develop process team
     project
  B. Recognition and reward should consider cultural differences
  C. None of the choices are correct
  D. To be effective, recognition and rewards should be based on
     activities under a person's control
  E. Zero sum rewards, that only a limited number of project team
     members can achieve

Answer: E

Question 308
You are the project manager for the manufacturer of children's toys.
Your project team is in the process of designing a new toy for children
for next Christmas season. Your 10 members are working together for
past six months. All 10 are in constant communication with each other.
How many lines of communications are their in your project team?
   A. 50
   B. 45
   C. 20
   D. 10
   E. 90

Answer: B

Question 309
Which of the following is buyer-prepared formal request sent to seller
and is basis upon which seller prepares n bid?
  A. Contract
  B. Procurement request
  C. None of the choices are correct
  D. Procurement document package
  E. Proposals

Answer: D

Question 310
 Which of the following is not one of the five project management
process group?
   A. Monitoring and controlling he group
   B. Initiating process group
   C. Fast tracking
   D. Executing process group
   E. Planning process group

Answer: C

Question 311
Top three cases on conflict on the project and project schedule, project
priorities and:
   A. Resources
   B. Cost
   C. Responsibilities
   D. Administrative procedures

Answer: A

Question 312
Which of the following are not situations where pre assignment of
project team members are known in advance?
   A. Staff assignment are defined in project charter
   B. Project is dependent on the expertise of certain people
   C. Promised as a part of competitive proposal
   D. None of the choices are correct

Answer: D

Question 313
Weighting systems, screening systems, and independent estimates are
tools of which process?
   A. Plan contracting
   B. Select sellers
   C. Plan purchase and acquisitions
   D. Request seller responses

Answer: B

Question 314
Which of the following project communication management process is
within the executing process group?
   A. Manage stakeholders
   B. Performance reporting
   C. Information distribution
   D. Communication planning

Answer: C

Question 315
Implemented change request, implemented corrective actions and
implemented preventive actions are inputs to which process?
  A. None of the choices are correct
  B. Direct and manage project execution
  C. Perform quality control
  D. Quality planning
  E. Perform quality assurance

Answer: E

Question 316
Which of the following tools can be used to help to analyze how quality
problems occur, and depict that how the various components of
system interrelate?
   A. Design of experiment
   B. Benchmarking
   C. Benefit/cost analysis
   D. Flowcharting

Answer: D

Question 317
During project executing, a previously unidentified risk has just
occurred. This risk will negatively effect the outcome of the project.
Which of the following is best to perform next?
   A. Alert the management team
   B. Develop the contingency plan
   C. Add reserves to the project to adjust for the risk
   D. Perform the risk audit
   E. Create a work around

Answer: E

Question 318
A manager works very closely with his subordinates to create an
effective working environment. Once a new person is hired, he works
with the employee to set realistic goals for the short term and long
term. In addition he continuously works with employee to discuss
career path and career ambitions.
He is constantly coaching, counseling and meeting. Once his
employees reach the goal, he reward them with merit,
increases/bonus , offer expanded job responsibilities, with new
challenges, which of the following motivational theories is least utilized
in his management approach to motivating his employees?
   A. B.F skinner's theory of behavioral reinforcement
   B. McGrager's theory X and theory Y
   C. Self efficacy theory
   D. Herzberg's motivation hygiene theory
   E. Vroom's expectancy theory

Answer: C

Question 319
All the following statements are true regarding communication
management plan except:
    A. The communication management plan is an input to information
       distribution process
    B. The communication management plan provides information on
       stakeholders communication requirements and glossary of
       common terminology
    C. None of choices are correct
    D. Communication management plan is out put of communication
       planning process

Answer: C

Question 320
You are a project manager for a company that sells online music. The
company is going so well that company has outgrown its I.T
infrastructure. In fact the company's current infrastructure is unable to
handle the terabytes of music downloads each day.
As a result company decided to give music download to 3rd party
content. On your qualified seller list you have identified one potential
vendor, music CM. your procure department has identified a large
difference between the independent estimate and proposed vendor
cost. Which of the following statements are true?
    A. You are currently in the plan purchases and acquisition process
    B. The vendor failed to respond to all the requirements specified in
       the proposal
    C. The vendor is incomplete and does not understand the scope of
       the project
  D. The SOW did not contain the enough detail
  E. If the discrepancy is in the company's favor your company
     should take the advantage of cost saving and select the vendor
     promptly.

Answer: D

Question 321
Which of the following are not the direct results of managing the
project team?
   A. Submitting change request
   B. Negotiating staff assignments
   C. Resolving issues
   D. Developing input to performance appraisals
   E. Recording the lessons learned

Answer: B

Question 322
Which of the following best describes the project human resource
management knowledge Area?
  A. Initiation, develop project team, acquire project team, develop
     project team
  B. Human resource planning , acquire project team, develop project
     team, manage project team
  C. Human resource planning , activity resource estimating, acquire
     project team, develop project team, manage project team
  D. Human resource planning, activity resource estimating , develop
     project team

Answer: B

Question 323
Which of the following statements are false regarding reward
recognition systems?
   A. Rewards and recognition system must also consider cultural
      differences
   B. rewards and recognition systems are tools of human resource
      planning process
   C. rewards and recognition systems are tools of develop project
      team process
   D. in order to be effective, reward and recognition system must
      make the link between project performance and reward clear
      and achievable
Answer: B

Question 324
Which of the following statements are not true regarding corrective
actions?
   A. Corrective actions are input to various controlling process
   B. Corrective action is used to bring expected future project
      performance in line with the project plan
   C. Approved corrective actions are inputs to the direct and manage
      project execution project
   D. Corrective actions are the outputs of processes in the controlling
      process group

Answer: A

Question 325
You are the project manager for the manufacturer of children's toys.
Your project team is in the process of designing a new toy for children
for next Christmas season.
Your project team has worked together for the last six months and has
become a self-directed team with little, If any management
supervision required. Which of the following stages of develop project
team best describes your team?
   A. Storming
   B. Norming
   C. None of the choices are correct
   D. Performing
   E. Forming


Answer: D

Question 326
which of the following best describes the request seller responses
process?
   A. Request seller response involves identifying whether to procure
      products from outside vendor
   B. Request seller response involves ensuring that the vendor meet
      the specified contractual requirements
   C. Request seller response involves the application of evaluation
      criteria to select a vendor
   D. Request seller response involves obtaining bids and proposals
      from prospective vendors

Answer: D

Question 327
All of the following statements regarding bidder conferences are true
EXCEPT:
    A. All potential sellers are given equal standing during this process
    B. Bidder conferences are tool/technique of request seller response
       process
    C. Bidder conferences are meeting with prospective seller after
       preparation of bid or a proposal
    D. Bidder conferences are also called contractor conferences and
       vendor conferences
    E. Bidder conferences are used to ensure that sellers have a clear
       understanding of the project requirement


Answer: C

Question 328
You are a project manager at a biotech company, where you are
leading a cross functional team to develop a treatment for diabetes.
The organization has a weak matrix structure, where al of your team
members report to different functional managers and none of the team
member report to you directly.
You have just completed the latest round of performance reviews and
identified the CPI is 1.15, SPI is1.05, and few minor adjustments are
needed. In order to improve the project performance and team
motivation you have decided to collaborate them into brand new
facility. The facility has the state of art gym and a 24 hour cafeteria.
Team is quite excited about the move.
Which of the following best describes the actions?
   A. Project is little behind schedule, and moves may delay project
       deliverables even more
   B. You subscribe to the McGregor's theory X motivation theory
   C. The performance reviews were inadequate, as additional
       adjustment should be identified
   D. Hertzberg's theory was incorrectly applied
   E. The move is motivating agent that will help improve the
       motivation and performance of project team

Answer: D
Question 329
You are in the contract Closure process and are reviewing the contract
process to identify the lessons learned. Which of the following best
describes the tool/technique you are using?
   A. Performance reviews
   B. Procurement reviews
   C. Performance audits
   D. Procurement audits
   E. Procurement reports

Answer: D

Question 330
Contract documentation is an input to the Contract Closure process. It
includes all of the following EXCEPT:
   A. Payment records
   B. Supporting schedule
   C. Warranties
   D. Approved change requests
   E. Procurement audit documentation

Answer: E

Question 331
Consider the project Integration Management knowledge area. Which
of the process are not included?
   A. Performance reporting
   B. Develop project charter
   C. Integrated change control
   D. Direct and manage project execution
   E. Develop project management plan

Answer: A

Question 332
During what phase of project lifecycle is the level of risk and
uncertainty is the lowest?
  A. Closing
  B. Executing
  C. Initiating
  D. Controlling
  E. Planning
Answer: A

Question 333
Which of the following best describes the tool/ technique used to
identify lessons learned during the procurement process, including the
identification and examination of any problems and areas for
improvement?
   A. Project archives
   B. Procurement reviews
   C. Procurement audits
   D. Project records
   E. Procurement reports

Answer: C

Question 334
Product verification is usually performed in closing process. Which of
the following statement are true?
   A. Product verification is a method for quantifying qualitative data
      to minimizes the effect of biases during select sellers
   B. Product verification is used to verify that work was completed
      correctly and satisfactorily
   C. Product verification is includes samples of the suppliers previous
      products for the purpose of providing a way to evaluate a
      supplier's capabilities
   D. Product verification provides management with information how
      effectively the seller is achieving the contractual objectives
   E. Contract closure and manage stakeholders processes both
      perform product verification

Answer: B

Question 335
You are the project manager at a large accounting firm in the United
States. Throughout the year your firm provides both consulting
services and accounting/ auditing services to XYZ Widgets, Inc, a
publicly traded company listed on the New York Stock Exchange.
Currently, your project involves auditing the financial statements of
XYZ Widgets Inc, in preparation for the annual shareholders/ investors
meeting.
While your team is in the midst of project execution, you are informed
that your project is due to new SEC regulations. Specifically, a new
SEC regulation prohibits accounting firms from providing both
consulting services and auditing services to a client, due to potential
conflicts of interest that could arise from such business relationships.
Hence your project is cancelled and your project team consisting of
accountants and auditors are taken off your project and reassigned to
another project. Which of the following statements are true?
   A. Since the project ended due to extinction, you should document
       the level and degree of completeness during the scope
       verification process
   B. Since the project ended due to integration, you should document
       the level and degree of completeness during the scope
       verification process
   C. Since the project ended due to starvation, you should document
       the level and degree of completeness during the scope
       verification process
   D. Since the project ended due to extinction, scope verification
       process is no longer necessary
   E. Since the project ended due to integration, scope verification
       process is no longer necessary

Answer: B

Question 336
All of the following are outputs the closure project process EXCEPT:
    A. Historical information
    B. Final product, service or result
    C. Administrative closure procedure
    D. Contract closure procedure
    E. Work performance information

Answer: E

Question 337
Which of the following establishes the procedures to transfer the
project product or services to production and / or operations?
   A. Formal acceptance documentation
   B. Administrative closure procedure
   C. Contract closure procedure
   D. Project files

Answer: B

Question 338
Which of the following statements are true regarding the procurement
audit tool/ technique?
   A. It is a tool/ technique of contract administration
   B. It review the procurement process from plan contracting through
      contract closure
   C. It review the procurement process from plan purchases and
      acquisitions through contract administration
   D. It review the procurement process from plan contracting through
      contract administration
   E. It review the procurement process from plan purchases and
      acquisitions through contract closure

Answer: C

Question 339
Which of the following formulas is used to calculate the CPI (cost
performance index)?
   A. EV/ AC
   B. EV-AC
   C. EV-PV
   D. EAC-AC
   E. EV/PV

Answer: A

Question 340
Historical records from previous project are generally used for all of
the following EXCEPT:
   A. Risk management
   B. Life cycle costing
   C. Project planning
   D. Estimating

Answer: B

Question 341
Which of the following statements are false regarding the close project
process?
   A. In multi-phase projects, the close project process closes out the
      associated activities applicable to a given project phase
   B. The output of the close project includes two procedures:
      administrative closure procedure and contract closure procedure
   C. The close project process is necessary for managing the contract
      and relationship between the buyer and seller
   D. The close project process establishes the procedures to verify
      and document the project deliverables
  E. The close project process documents the reasons for actions
     taken if a project is terminated early

Answer: C

Question 342
Which process group includes processes used to formally terminate all
activities of a project or a project phase?
   A. Executing
   B. Closing
   C. Planning
   D. Initiating
   E. Monitoring and controlling

Answer: B

Question 343
Earned value analysis is a performance reporting tool/ technique used
in manage stakeholder's process. Which of the following performance
measurements is derived by the following formula: (EAC-AC)?
   A. VAC
   B. CPI
   C. ETC
   D. CV
   E. SPI

Answer: C

Question 344
You are currently the project manager for a software development
project, developing a next generation data-mining tool. Your team is
developing a new software product that will help customers better
manage large volumes of data, especially for data reporting purposes.
Your team has just completed one of the project phases- developing a
simple prototype system. You would like to have prototype reviewed
prior to deciding whether to move to the next phase of the project.
According to the PMI, these types of reviews are NOT called:
   A. Phase exists
   B. Milestones
   C. Stage gates
   D. Kill points

Answer: B
Question 345
One of your friends is a manager at telecommunications company. She
is currently managing a project developing a VoIP (Voice over IP)
gateway that addresses the challenges facing service providers
deploying packer-based voice networks. The gateway offers a
comprehensive approach to implementing high-density carrier-class
voice over packet gateway applications. All the technical work has
already been completed on the project, and the project is in the
closing phase. Which of the following should be performed at this
stage?
    A. Verify the quality of process
    B. Perform scope verification
    C. Documents lessons learned
    D. Ensure that the project is integrated with other projects

Answer: C

Question 346
Which of the following statements are FALSE regarding Project closure
documents?
   A. Project closure documents establishes the procedures to perform
      product verification, update contract records to reflect final
      results, and archive information for future use.
   B. Project closure documents and project files are outputs of the
      Close Project Process
   C. The project closure documents provide formal documentation
      indicating the completion of project and transferring of project
      deliverables to others
   D. Project closure documents includes reasons why the project was
      terminated and formalizes the procedures for transferring the
      unfinished deliverables of the canceled project.

Answer: A

Question 347
Which of the following are NOT described in the PMI's Member
Standards of Conduct?
   A. Professional behavior
   B. None of the choices are correct
   C. Relationship with customers, clients and employees
   D. Relationship with public and global community
   E. Responsibilities of PMI membership

Answer: B
Question 348
You work at RFID-PM Inc, a publicly traded company that develops
RFID technology. Radio Frequency Identification RFID is a method of
remotely storing and retrieving data using devices called RFID tags/
transponders. An RFID tag is a small object, such as an adhesive
sticker, that can be attached to or incorporated into a product
Your friend, Nelson, has asked you for the financial information
regarding your company. So you decide to forward him the SEC
(Securities and Exchange Commission) 10K filing/ financial statements
from the SEC web-site. Hove you provided insider information
regarding your company?
    A. Although you have not provided, insider information you have
       violated the confidentiality agreement with your company
    B. Although you have not provided, insider information you have
       violated the non-disclosure agreement with your company
    C. You have not provided insider information since you merely
       forwarded publicly available data
    D. You have not provided insider information and violated the
       professional code of conduct

Answer: C

Question 349
You are a project manager at a construction company who is working
in a foreign country to perform reconstruction work for the various
infrastructure and utility services, including water, sewage, and
electricity. During your initial visit to the country, you were presented
a jewelry gift valued over $5,000. you were told that this is local
custom to give such gifts to business partners during their visits. What
should you do?
    A. Accept the gift so as not to offend anyone. However, report the
       gift to appropriate parties at your company so that you do not
       give the appearance of impropriety.
    B. Since the gift will not influence your future decisions, you can
       accept the gift as there is no conflict or interest
    C. Explain that the gift may be constructed as a conflict of interest
       and hence you cannot accept the gift
    D. Since accepting the gift may give the appearance of impropriety
       you should decline the gift

Answer: A

Question 350
You are the project manager within and information technology
department of a large retailer. You are responsible for updating the
network infrastructure of the company. As a project manager, you are
in the Select Sellers process, and have four different vendors on your
qualified sellers list.
One of the vendors on your list has invited you and your family to
Hawaii for a "convention". The vendor assures that the convention is
for legitimate business purposes and will be helpful in letting your
company better evaluating their offerings. However, you are hesitant
to accept the gift. To appraise your concerns, the vendor tells you that
they will be doing a demo of the systems and other members of your
project team in the past have attended. What should you do?
    A. Since the previous project managers has accepted the gift, the
       precedent has already been established within the organization.
       Hence, you can freely accept the gift
    B. Since you suspect that the meeting does NOT have legitimate
       business purpose, you should not accept, the gift, as it may give
       an appearance of impropriety
    C. You can freely accept the gift, since the trip has a legitimate
       business purpose. The vendor will be providing information
       regarding their systems.
    D. Since the convention may be useful, you may accept the
       invitation. However, you should report the acceptance of the gift
       to the appropriate people in your organization so that your
       actions are not questioned later on.

Answer: D

Question 351
Which of the following processes is considered the most effective
process to ensure that cultural and ethical differences do not impede
success of your multi-national project?
   A. Team building activities
   B. Collocation
   C. Training
   D. Norming
   E. Delphi technique

Answer: C

Question 352
You are the project manager within an information technology
department of a large retailer. In order to allow for better real-time
tracking, inventory control, and supply chain management, your
company is financing a project to install and deploy RFID tags on all
items of merchandise. As a project manger, you've just completed the
Select Sellers process, and selected a vendor to perform the RFID
installation and deployment.
After the contract is assigned with the vendor, the account manager
from the vendor calls for thank you for selecting them. As a thank-you
gift, they would like to give you and your project team tickets to a free
dinner convention, where the vendor will be providing a demo if their
latest RFID systems. How should you respond?
    A. You should not accept the gift, unless the vendor is willing to
       extend this gift to other members of the project team
    B. You can freely accept the gift, since you were not aware of the
       gift during the selection process. The gift will not influence your
       decisions, and hence, there is no impropriety
    C. You should not accept the gift, as it may have an appearance of
       impropriety
    D. You should accept the gift, as long as you tell the vendor to give
       you the gift privately
    E. You can accept the gift, as there is no appearance of impropriety
       with this type of gift.

Answer: C

Question 353
Which of the following statements are true regarding the project
charter?
   A. The project charter describes the business needs of the project
      and should be published by a manager external to the project
   B. The project charter describes the business needs of the project
      and should be published under the name of the project sponsor
   C. The project charter does not describe the business needs of the
      project and should be published under the name of the project
      manager
   D. The project charter describes the business needs of the project
      and should be published under the name of the project manager
   E. None of the statements are true

Answer: A

Question 354
Which of the following statements are NOT true?
  A. Ambiguous jurisdiction is more common in a weak matrix
     organization than a projectized organization
   B. Ambiguous jurisdiction is more common in a functional
      organization than a strong matrix organization
   C. Ambiguous jurisdiction is more common in a strong matrix
      organization than a weak matrix organization
   D. Ambiguous jurisdiction is more common in a functional
      organization than a strong projectized organization

Answer: C

Question 355
You are the project manager for an information technology division of
a large health care provider in the United States. Due to the new
regulatory requirements enacted by HIPAA to ensure the privacy of
confidential medical records, you have been assigned to audit all I.T
systems to ensure compliance.
You need to ensure that all data stored in the data base is encrypted
to ensure confidentiality. You need to ensure that all users are
properly authenticated. You also need to verify that authorization to
confidential information follows the least privilege principle
The deadline to ensure compliance with HIPAA regulations is within
120 days. Failing to complete the project within 120 days will result in
significant fines to your organization. You have been given a budget is
fixed and cannot be increased.
Which of the following statements are true?
   A. This project came about due to legal requirements, and the
       primary constraint is schedule
   B. This project came about due to risk mitigation, and the primary
       constraint is budget
   C. This project came about due to legal requirements, and the
       primary constraint is the budget
   D. This project came about due to risk mitigation, and the primary
       constraint is schedule

Answer: A

Question 356
You have been recently hired to be a project manager at a software
company to develop the next generation anti-virus software program.
The project requires significant coordination across multiple
departments, from engineering to QA to manufacturing. You are
concerned whether you'll have enough influence and authority to
manage the project priorities across these various departments. What
should you do in this situation?
  A. Evaluate the organizational structure to understand your level of
     authority in managing the project
  B. Enhance the project charter to officially grant you the authority
     you need to manage these separate departments
  C. Negotiate with senior executives to obtain necessary levels of
     authority across the departments
  D. Focus on improving your assertiveness in order to influence the
     other departments

Answer: A

Question 357
Which of the following statements are true regarding the project
statement of work?
   A. The project statement of work is one of the outputs to the
      develop Preliminary Project Scope Statement process.
   B. The project statement of work describes the factors that
      influence the project's success, including company culture,
      marketplace conditions, stakeholder risk tolerance etc.
   C. The project statement of work is one of the outputs to the
      develop project charter process
   D. The project statement of work describes the business needs,
      product scope description, and strategic plan for the project.
   E. The project statement of work describes the processes and
      procedures for conducting work and knowledge base for storing
      and retrieving information

Answer: D

Question 358
One of your friends is a project manager at a computer security
company. She is currently managing a project for the development of
a NAC (network admissions control) appliance that uses the network
infrastructure to enforce security policy compliance on all devices
seeking to access network computing resources, thereby limiting
damage from emerging security threats.
Her project team has just completed the initial project budget and
schedule and is ensure what to perform next. Which of following would
you recommend as the NEXT BEST action to perform?
    A. Identify project risks
    B. Develop the WBS
    C. Start project iteration
    D. Develop the PDM
    E. Identify communications requirements
Answer: E

Question 359
You are an information security project manager responsible for
securing your corporate network. Due to new regulations mandated by
the Sarbanes-Oxley act, your company's upper management has
tasked you with securing the company's network infrastructure.
You have just completed the develop preliminary project scope
statement process. However upon review you've determined the
resulting preliminary project scope statement is ambiguous and poorly
written. A poorly written Preliminary Project Scope Statement will
directly impact all of the following EXCEPT:
   A. Ability to define, prepare and integrate all subsidiary plan into
       the project management plan
   B. Ability to create project scope management plan that defines
       how the project scope will be defined and managed
   C. Ability to create the work breakdown structure
   D. Ability to develop the detailed project scope statement as the
       basis for future project decisions

Answer: C

Question 360
You are currently the project manager for a software development
project, developing a next generation data-mining tool. Your team is
developing a new software product that will help customers better
manage large volumes of data, especially for data reporting purposes.
Midway through the project your customers has asked you to add
additional reporting functionality to the software, specifically to
correlate sales data across multiple geographic regions based on time.
The functionality was NOT part of the original project plan. This is an
example of which of the following?
   A. Crashing the schedule
   B. Scope creep
   C. Gold plating
   D. Fast tracking
   E. Inadequate project planning

Answer: B

Question 361
Which of the following describes the following organizational structure?
   A.   Weak matrix Org
   B.   Projectized Org
   C.   Strong matrix Org
   D.   Balanced matrix Org
   E.   Functional Org

Answer: C

Question 362
You are the project manger at a utility company. Due to the recent rise
in the cost of petroleum, your organization is exploring cheaper,
alternatives forms of energy. You are in the process of developing the
project charter. All of the following are tools/ techniques that you can
use to develop the project charter EXCEPT:
    A. Project management methodologies
    B. PMIS
    C. Alternatives identification
    D. Project selection methods
    E. Expert judgment

Answer: C

Question 363
You are the project manager for a large children's toys manufacturer.
You've been asked to manufacture the latest craze in "Dancing
Widgets" for the upcoming Christmas season. You've been informed
that the company needs at least one month lead time to distribute the
Widgets in order to have the Widgets on retailers shelves for the
Christmas season.
Hence, based on the current sales forecast you have been asked to
deliver 100,000 units by august 1st at the latest. Which document
describes the business needs for this project, identifies key
deliverables, and gives you authority to begin the project and start
assigning resources?
   A. Ishikawa document
   B. RFQ
   C. WBS
   D. RFP
   E. None of the choices are correct

Answer: E

Question 364
You are the project manager at Happy Coffee Cafe, a rapidly growing
franchise selling premium blended coffee. Currently, your company is
planning on opening additional stores through the United states. Your
target markets primarily include densely populated metropolitan areas.
Your company is evaluating different areas for expansion, including
New York, San Francisco, and Seattle. Based on your market analysis
you have obtained the following information:
New York-IRR (33%), payback period (1.5 years)
San Francisco-IRR (45%), payback period (1.1 years)
Seattle-IRR (36%), payback period (0.75 years)

Based on this data which area is best for Happy Coffee Cafe?
  A. New York since IRR is lowest
  B. Seattle since payback period is shortest
  C. San Francisco since the IRR is the highest
  D. New York since the payback period is the longest

Answer: C

Question 365
Which of the following statements are true regarding straight line
depreciation?
  A. It is a method that is calculated by subtracting the salvage value
     of the asset from the purchase prices, and then dividing this
     number by the estimated useful life of asset.
  B. It is determined by subtracting current liabilities from current
     assets
   C. It is the length of time it takes to recoup the initial cost of
      investing the project. This method compares the initial
      investment with the cash flows expected during the life of the
      project.
   D. It is the discount rate at which the present value of the future
      cash flows of an investment equals the cost of initial investment

Answer: A

Question 366
Which of the following is NOT a valid reason to authorize a project?
  A. Risk mitigation
  B. Social needs
  C. Customer requests
  D. Legal requirements
  E. Technological advance

Answer: A

Question 367
Which of the following statements are TRUE regarding the difference
between a project expeditor and project coordinator roles?
   A. The project expeditor has some authority and power to make
      decisions
   B. The project expeditor reports to a higher level manager
   C. The project expeditor cannot make or enforce decisions
   D. The project expeditor is found more often in a strong matrix
      organization

Answer: C

Question 368
You have been assigned to a project to build the largest U.S. natural
gas pipeline project in more than 20 years. The proposed 1,350-mile,
42-inch diameter pipeline will provide valuable infrastructure allowing
producers in the Rocky Mountain region to deliver their natural gas to
attractive markets in the Midwest and northeastern parts of the U.S.
You are in the project planning process where you are involved in
identifying the specific schedule activities that need to be performed to
produce the various project deliverables. During this process one of
your team members identifying an activity that need to be
accomplished. However, another team member, based on this
interpretation of the project scope statement, believes that the activity
is outside the scope of project. Which of the following is the BEST
action to take?
    A. Mediate between the team members until consensus is reached
    B. Ask clarification from senior management
    C. Research the issue personally, and make an informed decision
    D. Ask clarification from project sponsor
    E. Ask clarification from the change control board

Answer: D

Question 369
You are the project manager for an information technology division of
a large financial services firm in the United States. Your company
offers a web based trading platform that provides options and futures
trading for U.S commodities markets. Due to the rise in popularity of
futures and options trading, your company has grown rapidly. In fact,
due to rapid growth, the company's I.T. infrastructure is unable to
meet the growing demands.
To keep up with the demands you have been assigned the
responsibility of upgrading the company's network and company's
infrastructure. You have been asked to calculate the payback period
for the project that is to be completed in the next 24 months.
    A. 4.5 years
    B. 4 years
    C. 5.5 years
    D. 3 years
    E. 2 years

Answer: B

Question 370
You are the project manger at XYZ Software Corp, a U.S software
company developing enterprise Human Resources Applications. You've
been asked to reduce the company's engineering costs by developing
an off-shore software development centre.
Recently a senior VP of engineering has expressed concerns over the
project plan. His concern is that if the project is implemented as
planned, he'll have to layoff a substantial portion number of US based
software engineers. The organizational impact of the layoffs is
substantial and was not taken into consideration during the project
planning?
   A. The conflict between the project sponsor and senior VP should be
      resolved in favor of the project sponsor.
   B. Based on the input from the senior VP, you should file a change
      request item to adjust the project plan accordingly.
   C. Since the impact of the layoffs was not taken into account during
      project planning, the project should be definitely postponed until
      the impact can be thoroughly examined. The project plan should
      be revised to accommodate for the organizational impact of the
      layoffs.
   D. The conflict between project stakeholders should be resolved in
      favor of the customer
   E. The conflict between the project sponsor and the Senior VP
      should be resolved in favor of the Senior VP.

Answer: B

Question 371
Which of the following statements about fast-tracking is TRUE?
  A. One of the advantages of fast-tracking is that it can often lead to
     reduced rework and reduces project risks.
  B. Fast tracking is the process of increasing the schedule by
     overlapping various project tasks.
  C. None of the statements are true
  D. Fast tracking refers to assigning additional resources to a project
     in an attempt to decrease project schedule/ timeline.
  E. Fast tracking involves performing activities sequentially

Answer: C

Question 372
Which of the following best describes cost incurred in the past whose
total will not be affected by any decisions made now or in the future?
   A. Indirect cost
   B. Variable cost
   C. Direct cost
   D. Sunk cost
   E. Fixed cost

Answer: D

Question 373
Which of the following best describes fast-tracking?
  A. None of the choices are correct
  B. Process of quickly identifying the characteristics of a product
  C. Process of starting a new task prior to the completion of current
     project tasks
   D. Process of soliciting proposals from prospective vendors and
      sellers

Answer: C

Question 374
One of your friend is a project manager at a natural gas energy
company. He is managing a project for the construction and operation
of pipeline facilities at U.S. points of entry for the import or export of
natural gas. The company had performed a similar project a couple
years ago.
This is the critical project for the company and he is under a
tremendous pressure to deliver the project. Unfortunately, he is new
to the company and the project is growing in size every day. He is
starting to feel overwhelmed by the project. What is his BEST course
of action?
   A. Ask for additional resource from his supervisor
   B. Determine stakeholders expectations and manage their influence
   C. Ask the previous project manager for assistance
   D. Obtain the historical records and guidance from the PMO

Answer: D

Question 375
Which of the following regarding project charter is FALSE?
  A. The project charter grants authority to the project manager to
     initiate the project
  B. The project charter should be published by the project manager
  C. The project charter authorizes the project
  D. The project charter describes the business needs for the project,
     such as marketing demands, legal requirements, technological
     advances

Answer: B

Question 376
Which of the following statements are TRUE regarding the scope
verification process?
   A. None of the statements are true
   B. The tool/ technique of scope verification is inspection
   C. Scope verification is primarily concerned with verifying the
       correctness of work results
   D. Scope verification involves evaluating overall project
      performance to ensure that the project will satisfy specified
      project requirements

Answer: B

Question 377
Which of the following are tool/ technique of Perform Quality Control
that involves measuring or testing results to determine whether they
confirm to the requirements and quality standards?
   A. Sampling
   B. Pareto diagram
   C. Inspection
   D. Control charts
   E. Monitoring

Answer: C

Question 378
You are the Chief Technology officer of a major Stock Exchange. You
are in charge of a project to reengineer the organization's bank office
accounting, billing and administrative systems. Your project team is in
the process of implementing the technical work required for the
project. However, one of the stakeholders for your project is
requesting minor changes to the project deliverables. You call a
meeting with your project team to determine how to best proceed with
the change. This is an example of which of the following?
    A. Management by objectives
    B. Lack o change control system
    C. Inadequate levels of decomposition of the work packages
    D. Team consensus building
    E. Proper integrate change control

Answer: B

Question 379
You are in the process of controlling changes to a project baseline.
Which of the following is the LEAST helpful input?
  A. Project funding requirements
  B. Cost baseline
  C. Activity cost estimates
  D. Performance reports
  E. Work performance information
Answer: C

Question 380
You have been assigned to a project to construct a 18-hole golf
course, featuring 7,500 yard, par-72 course that has a magnificent
tropical setting. You've calculated the estimated project completion
date. However the estimated completion date is 5 months after the
desired completion date. After analyzing the project network diagram,
you've determined that many of the activities have discretionary
dependencies. To decrease the project duration you've requested
additional resources, but were told that NO additional resources are
available for your project. Assuming that the project has low risks,
which of the following is the BEST plan of action?
   A. Skip risk management planning
   B. Omit a project activity
   C. Fast track the activities
   D. Crash the schedule
   E. Reduce the quality of deliverables

Answer: C

Question 381
You are in the process of monitoring the various project processes and
their performance. Which of the following is the LEAST appropriate
output of this process?
   A. Requested changes
   B. Recommended defect repair
   C. Recommended preventive actions
   D. Recommended corrective actions
   E. Project scope statement updates

Answer: E

Question 382
Which of the following best describes secondary risks?
  A. Risks that still remain after implementing a risk response
  B. Risk that arise due to quality issue
  C. Risk that come about as a direct result of implementing a risk
     response
  D. None of the choices are correct

Answer: C

Question 383
Which of the following tools/techniques can be used to help ensure
that project work tasks will NOT be duplicated by multiple team
members?
   A. PMIS
   B. Change control board
   C. Work authorization system
   D. Change control system
   E. Configuration management

Answer: C

Question 384
You are in the process of monitoring the various project processes and
their performance. Which of the following are you LEAST concerned
with during this process?
   A. Analyzing and tracking project risks
   B. Monitoring the implementation of approved changes
   C. Comparing actual project performance against project
      management plan
   D. Providing forecast to update current schedule information
   E. Assessing information to determine whether corrective actions
      are necessary
   F. Reviewing and approving all recommended corrective and
      preventive actions

Answer: F

Question 385
You are in the process of controlling changes to the project scope. All
of the following are outputs of this process EXCEPT:
    A. Scope baseline updates
    B. Requested changes
    C. Recommended corrective actions
    D. Activity list updates
    E. Project management pan updates

Answer: D

Question 386
Which of the following statements are true regarding bar charts?
  A. Bar charts are generally better at illustrating the resource trade-
     offs compared with network diagrams
  B. Bar charts are generally better at illustrating progress or status
     compared with network diagrams
   C. Bar charts are generally better at illustrating critical paths
      compared with network diagrams
   D. Bar charts are generally better at illustrating logical relationship
      compared with network diagrams

Answer: B

Question 387
Which of the following scheduling techniques focuses on managing
buffer activity durations and the resources applied to the planned
scheduled activities, instead of managing the total float of network
paths?
   A. What-if scenario analysis
   B. Critical chain method
   C. Critical path method
   D. Monte Carlo analysis
   E. Variance analysis

Answer: B

Question 388
Keeping up with the growth was becoming a problem for a privately
owned Chinese financial services company. Although it easily lured
business from state-owned competitors, low skill levels and weak
accounting systems threaten the company's cash flow. Moreover,
poorly invested assets were delivering inadequate returns.
Hence, you have been assigned over an existing project to upgrade
the IT system to allow for an expansion. Specifically, the IT upgrade
will enable the company to serve more competitors, expand the
product line, gain market share, and win more licenses.
The previous project manager for the project lacked an understanding
of project management principles. In fact, upon close investigation,
you've determined that the project lacks clearly defined project
deliverables and lacks management control. Which of the following
would be the BEST approach to resolve these short comings?
     A. Implement a network authorization system
     B. Subdivide the project deliverables into smaller, more
        manageable components until the work is defined to the work
        package level
     C. Implement a project control system
     D. Incorporate a system life cycle approach to the project
     E. Integrate a lessons learned for each project phase

Answer: D
Question 389
You are the project manger at a leading manufacturer of consumer
electronics, personal computers and peripherals. Unfortunately, your
company is facing a rapidly maturing market characterized by
consolidation and commoditization. Hence you have been assigned a
project to drive growth and profit by integrating an online CRM
(costumer relationship management) solution. Industry benchmarks
suggest the CRM solution should generate $100-$300M in bottom the
benefits.
The project timeline is very aggressive and a lot is at stake with this
project. Hence every week you report on the progress and status of
the project to all the stakeholders and project sponsors. Your project
team has already completed the project initials and project planning
activities and received sign off and approval on the project charter,
project scope and detailed work packages. Your project team is in the
process of completing all the work packages. The project time line is
very aggressive and your project has a SPI of 1.2 and CPI of1.3. Final
review of the project deliverables have been scheduled for the end of
the months.
Unfortunately as your project near completion you are informed that
your project is being cancelled since the resulting product is
unacceptable and does not meet the business needs of the
organization. Which of the following is most likely cause of this
scenario?
   A. The project status was not properly communicated to the
       interested parties
   B. Your project resources were required on the higher priority
       project
   C. The project was behind schedule and plagued with cost overrun
   D. The project charter did not provide enough detail regarding the
       project goals prior to sign off
   E. A key stakeholder is not sufficiently involved in the project


Answer: E

Question 390
Which of the following is true regarding configuration control board?
  A. A CCB describes how change request will be managed and
     tracked
  B. A CCB is a collection of procedures that describes how to submit
     change request
  C. A CCB defines the level of authority needed to approve changes
   D. A CCB has the authority to approve or project request

Answer: D

Question 391
Which of the following is configuration management activity that is
involved with ensuring that the performance and the functional
requirement defined in the configuration document have been met?
   A. Configuration status accounting
   B. None of the choices are correct
   C. Configuration definition
   D. Configuration identification
   E. Configuration verification and auditing

Answer: E

Question 392
 You are a project manager responsible for constructing a new sports
arena in preparation of upcoming Olympics. Construction begins on the
project over a year ago. The stakeholder of a project wants a status
report on the performance of the project to date.
Unfortunately you are afraid to tell your stakeholders that your project
is coming in significant behind schedule. In fact schedule delays are so
severe that the rebaselining of the project schedule is required. Which
of the following statement are true?
    A. Rebaselining is used as your first resort in controlling the
       schedule
    B. Approval from all stakeholders is required prior to rebaselining
       the schedule
    C. Historical data may be removed when you rebaseline the
       schedule
    D. None of the choices are correct

Answer: C

Question 393
All are the part of scope baseline except:
    A. Project scope statement
    B. WBS
    C. WBS dictionary
    D. Corrective actions

Answer: D
Question 394
Risk monitoring and control process involves all of the following
except:
   A. Quantifying the possible outcome for the project and their
      probabilities
   B. Reanalyzing existing risks
   C. Monitoring trigger for contingency plan
   D. Reviewing execution of risk Reponses
   E. Tracking identified risks

Answer: A

Question 395
You are a project manager at java ice cream factory. You are currently
supervising the manufacturing of new flavor ice cream java bean,
burgundy crunch. The manufacturing of this flavor was proceeding as
planned, until a manufacturing error occurred that requires corrective
action to be taken. Ironically the manufacturing error resulted in a new
variant of the flavor.
Product team really thinks that flavor would be a success in a
marketplace. They have asked you to cancel the corrective action, and
integrate this serendipitous discovery in the manufacturing process. As
a project manager you have realized that this has resulted in a change
in project scope. Which of the following statement are true?
   A. Workarounds are used to correct problems that occur with
      changes in the project scope
   B. Changes to the product scope should be in the project scope
   C. Changes to the product scope are a result of implementing
      corrective actions
   D. Changes to the product scope are defined in the integrated
      change control plan

Answer: B

Question 396
You are a project manager for a company that sells online music. Your
project is to develop a new content management system that will not
only manage all users purchase downloads, but will automatically learn
the users music interests in order to make future product
recommendations. In addition your content management system must
scale to support millions of concurrent music downloads a day.
Your team has made significant progress on the project. You are
preparing the performance of a project to date and have calculated the
following measurements.
     PV=4,000            EV= 3,500             AC= 3,000
Which of the following statements are true?
  A. The CV is positive number, which implies that your project is
     under budget
  B. The CV is positive number, which implies that your project is
     over budget
  C. The CV is negative number, which implies that your project is
     under budget
  D. The CV is negative number, which implies that your project is
     over budget

Answer: A

Question 397
Which of the following statements are true regarding project risk
management?
  A. None of the statements are true
  B. Qualitative risk analysis involves numerically analyzing the
     impacts of identified risks
  C. Risk monitoring and control involves tracking identified risks and
     executing risk response
  D. Risk identification involves how to plan and execute risk
     management activities
  E. Risk management planning involves determining which risks
     might affect the project

Answer: C

Question 398
Which of the following statements are true regarding cost and
schedule variances?
   A. The amount of variance of CV and SV values tend to increase as
      the project reaches completion
   B. The amount of variance of CV and SV values remain the same as
      the project reaches completion
   C. Schedule variance will ultimately equal to cost variance when
      project is completed
   D. The amount of variance of CV and SV values tend to decrease as
      the project reaches completion

Answer: D

Question 399
You are the project manager for the company that sells online music.
Your project is to develop a new content management system that will
not only manage all users purchases and downloads, but will
automatically learn the users music interests in order to make future
product recommendations. In addition your content management
system must scale to support millions of concurrent music downloads a
day.
Your team has made significant progress on the project. You are
preparing the performance of a project to date and have calculated the
following measurements.
       PV=4,000          EV= 3,500               AC= 3,000
What is the SPI of this project?
    A. 1.333
    B. 0.875
    C. 1.14
    D. 1.16
    E. 0.75

Answer: B

Question 400
Which of the following statements are false regarding the cost change
control system?
   A. It defines the procedures by which the cost baseline may be
      changes
   B. It defines the approval level necessary for authorizing the
      changes
   C. It provides information on the project scope and cost
      performance, such as which budgets have been met and which
      are not.
   D. It should be integrated into the integrated change control
      system
   E. Integrated change control system

Answer: C

Question 401
Which of the following statements are NOT techniques used to resolve
conflicts on a project?
   A. Directing, smoothing
   B. Forcing, smoothing
   C. Compromise, confrontation
   D. Withdrawal, forcing
   E. Controlling, compromise
Answer: A, E

Question 402
Which of the following s most likely to require a rebaselining in order
to provide a realistic measure of performance?
   A. Revised cost estimates
   B. Corrective actions
   C. Change requests
   D. Budget updates

Answer: D

Question 403
One of your friends is a manager at telecommunications company. She
is currently managing a project developing a VoIP (Voice over IP)
gateway that addresses the challenges facing service providers
deploying packer-based voice networks. The gateway offers a
comprehensive approach to implementing high-density carrier-class
voice over packet gateway applications. She is in the process of
developing the project schedule, and has determined that the project
has 4 critical paths. Which of the following BEST describes how the
project will be impacted?
    A. The project will cost more
    B. The scenario is incorrect, as a project can only have one critical
       path
    C. The project will require more people
    D. The project risk will increase

Answer: D

Question 404
You are the project manager within a large multi-national company.
Your current project involves a large software development project
that involves coordination of resources across four different
reengineering teams across three different countries. Specifically your
UI team is based in India, your database team and middleware team is
in U.S., and your QA team is in Canada. The engineers in each of the
team report to geographic functional manger, but are currently on loan
to you for your project.
You are currently in the process of assessing the completion status for
each work packages. In order to develop an accurate status of the
project, you've asked each of the engineers to report their percentage
complete for their respective deliverables.
However, when asked for the percentage completion status, one of the
QA engineers innocently responds, "Percentage complete of what
exactly?" ever since the project started you've always thought that this
QA engineer was difficult to manage. Especially tired of such
comments, you finally decided to report to the QA engineer's
functional manager regarding the engineer's lack of cooperation.
Based on the scenario described above, which of the following BEST
describes the real problem?
   A. The QA engineer was not technically competent and could not
      meet the satisfy his assigned responsibilities.
   B. There was a conflict of interest between your project and QA
      engineer's objectives
   C. You should have met with functional manager the first time you
      encountered problems with this engineer, rather than let the
      problem escalate.
   D. You did not receive the necessary support from the functional
      manager regarding your project
   E. The work packages were not adequately defined for the project

Answer: E

Question 405
You are in the process of controlling changes to the project cost
baseline. Which of the following is the LEAST helpful tool/ technique?
   A. Cost change control system
   B. Forecasting, variance management
   C. Analogous estimating, parametric estimating
   D. Performance measurement analysis
   E. Project performance reviews

Answer: C

Question 406
Which of the following statements are FALSE regarding project time
management?
  A. Schedule cost involving changes to the project schedule
  B. Activity resource estimating involves estimating type and
     qualities of resources required to perform each schedule activity
  C. None of the choices are correct
  D. Activity sequencing involves identifying dependencies among
     schedule activities
  E. Schedule development involves analyzing activity sequences,
     durations, resource requirements in order to create project
     schedule
Answer: C

Question 407
The applied level of change control is LEAST dependent upon:
  A. Complexity of specified project
  B. Context and environment in which project is performed
  C. Application area
  D. Stakeholder risk tolerances
  E. Contract requirements

Answer: D

Question 408
Which of the following calculates the difference between the budget at
completion and estimate at completion?
  A. EAC
  B. VAC
  C. EV
  D. CV
  E. SV

Answer: B

Question 409
Which of the following best describes this illustration?




   A. Cause and effect diagram
   B. Histogram
   C. Gantt chart
  D. Scatter diagram
  E. Pareto chart

Answer: B

Question 410
Approved corrective actions are an input to which process?
  A. Schedule development
  B. Direct an manage project execution
  C. Integrate change control
  D. Scope verification
  E. Scope control

Answer: B

Question 411
Change control system, variance analysis, replanning and
configuration management systems are tool/ techniques of which
process?
   A. Scope planning
   B. Scope control
   C. Scope verification
   D. Scope definition

Answer: B

Question 412
You are project manager responsible for constructing a new sports
arena for the upcoming Olympics. Construction began on a project
over a year ago. The stakeholders of the project want a status report
on the performance of the project to date. You've obtained the
following measurements:
BAC=500, ETC=200, PV=500, AC=200, EV=300, CPI=1.5
You believe the type of variances that have occurred on the project to
date are typical, and do not expect these variances to continue. What
is the VAC for the project?
    A. 100
    B. 400
    C. 300
    D. 200
    E. 333.33

Answer: A
Question 413
Which of the following consists of tools and techniques used to gather,
integrate, and disseminate the outputs of the project management
processes?
   A. EVM
   B. PDM
   C. WBS
   D. PMIS
   E. ADM

Answer: D

Question 414
You are the project manager at the Java Ice Cream Factory. You are
currently supervising the manufacturing of a new flavor of ice cram
JavaBean Burgundy Crunch. The manufacturing of this new flavor was
proceeding as planned, until a manufacturing error occurred that
requires corrective actions to be taken. To ensure the effectiveness of
corrective actions, corrective actions frequently require which of the
following?
    A. Resource leveling
    B. Rebaselining project schedule baseline
    C. Performance measurements
    D. Rebaselining project cost baseline
    E. Root-cause analysis

Answer: E

Question 415
All of the following statements are TRUE regarding ground rules
EXCEPT:
    A. Ground rules area tools/ techniques of develop project team
       process
    B. Ground rules are a list of acceptable and unacceptable behaviors
       adopted by project team.
    C. All project team members share responsibility for enforcing the
       ground rules
    D. Ground rules help to improve working relationships and
       communication
    E. Ground rules help to authorize and define the scope of a new
       phase or project.

Answer: E
Question 416
You are in the process of reviewing all change requests and controlling
changes to deliverables and organizational process assets. All of the
following are INPUTS except:
    A. Work performance information
    B. Recommended preventive actions and corrective actions
    C. Requested changes
    D. Forecasts
    E. Project management plan

Answer: D

Question 417
Which of the following BEST describes the procedures by which the
project schedule can change, and includes the paperwork, tracking
systems, and approval levels necessary for authorizing changes?
   A. Schedule change control system
   B. None of the statements are correct
   C. Integrated change control
   D. Schedule comparison bar charts
   E. Configuration management system

Answer: A

Question 418
The administrative closure procedure is an output of the close project
process. It is an input to which process?
   A. Manage stakeholders
   B. Integrated change control
   C. Direct and manage project execution
   D. Contract closure

Answer: C

Question 419
You are the project manager at a large accounting firm in the United
States. Throughout the year your firm provides both consulting
services and accounting/ auditing services to XYZ Widgets, Inc, a
publicly traded company listed on the New York Stock Exchange.
Currently, your project involves auditing the financial statements of
XYZ Widgets Inc, in preparation for the annual shareholders/ investors
meeting.
While your team is in the midst of project execution, you are informed
that your project is due to new SEC regulations. Specifically, a new
SEC regulation prohibits accounting firms from providing both
consulting services and auditing services to a client, due to potential
conflicts of interest that could arise from such business relationships.
As a result, your project is cancelled, and the budget for your project
is cut. Without the necessary budget, your project team is disbanded
and your project team members go to their separate ways. Which of
the following statements are true?
    A. Since the project ended due to starvation, the scope verification
       process is no longer necessary
    B. Since the project ended due to integration, the scope verification
       process is no longer necessary
    C. Since the project ended due to starvation, you should document
       the level and degree of completeness during the Scope
       Verification process.
    D. Since the project ended due to integration, you should document
       the level and degree of completeness during the Scope
       Verification process.
    E. Since the project ended due to extinction, the scope verification
       process is no longer necessary

Answer: C

Question 420
The administrative closure procedure that is an output of the close
project process includes all of the following EXCEPT:
   A. Define stakeholders approval requirements for changes
   B. Validate exit criteria have been satisfied
   C. Verify all deliverables have been provided and accepted
   D. Close all contracts associated with the completed project
   E. Confirm that the project has met sponsor and stake holder's
      requirements

Answer: D

Question 421
In which of the following documents will you find specific procedures
for contract closure?
   A. Contract terms and conditions
   B. Project plan
   C. Procurement audit documentation
   D. Contract change control system
   E. Contract file

Answer: A
Question 422
Which of the following statements are FALSE regarding the relationship
between project phase and project life cycles?
   A. Collectively, the project phases are known as the project life
      cycle
   B. The conclusion of project phase is generally marked by a review
      of key deliverables and current project performance
   C. Project phase-end reviews are often called phase-exits
   D. Each project phase is marked by the completion of one or more
      milestones

Answer: D

Question 423
All of the following are outputs of the close project process EXCEPT:
    A. Historical information
    B. Project management plan updates
    C. Project closure documents
    D. Formal acceptance documentation
    E. Project files

Answer: B

Question 424
Your project is coming to an end, and you are in the process of listing
the activities that must be performed to close out the project. Which of
the following should be performed during the closing processes?
   A. Seek legal counsel from the company's attorney prior to closing
      the project
   B. Request final inspection reports for all vendor supplied products
   C. Issue a formal notice of project completion to sellers
   D. Issue payment schedules and requests

Answer: C

Question 425
Which of the following documents formally indicates that the customer
or sponsor has officially accepted the project deliverables?
   A. Historical information
   B. Formal acceptance documentation
   C. Project closure documents
   D. Project files
Answer: B

Question 426
Historical record from previous project are generally used for all of the
following EXCEPT:
    A. Lessons learned
    B. Estimating
    C. Risk management
    D. Project planning

Answer: A

Question 427
Which of the following statements are true?
  A. Procurement audits review the procurement process      from plan
     purchases and acquisition to contract administration
  B. Procurement audits review the procurement process      from plan
     purchases and acquisition to close project
  C. Procurement audits review the procurement process      from plan
     purchases and acquisition to contract closure
  D. Procurement audits review the procurement process      from plan
     contracting to contract closure

Answer: A

Question 428
One of your friends is a manager at telecommunications company. She
is currently managing a project developing a VoIP (Voice over IP)
gateway that addresses the challenges facing service providers
deploying packer-based voice networks. The gateway offers a
comprehensive approach to implementing high-density carrier-class
voice over packet gateway applications. All the technical work has
already been completed on the project, and the project is in the
closing phase. All of the following should be performed at this stage
EXCEPT:
    A. Analyze the success or failure of the project
    B. Documents lessons learned
    C. Perform product verification
    D. Create the project archives
    E. Obtain formal acceptance of the project scope and deliverables

Answer: E

Question 429
Which of the following statements are true regarding the procurement
audit?
  A. The primary purpose of procurement audit is to identify lessons
      learned during the procurement process
  B. The procurement audit is a tool/ technique of the contract
      administration process
  C. The procurement audit is a tool/ technique of the close project
      process
  D. The procurement audit provides information regarding how
      effectively the seller is meeting contractual obligations

Answer: A

Question 430
You have been recently hired to be a project manager at a bio-tech
company to develop anew drug for the treatment of malignant
melanoma. As part of feasibility study, your team has been evaluating
the feasibility for such a drug using computer simulation.
Your team has just completed one of the project phases by designing a
potential chemical compound using a sophisticated computer model.
You would like to have model reviewed prior to deciding whether to
move to the next phase of the project. According to the PMI, these
type of reviews are called:
   A. Phase exists
   B. Deliverables
   C. Target goals
   D. Milestones

Answer: A

Question 431
Which of the following formulas is used to calculate the SPI (schedule
performance index)?
   A. EV-PV
   B. EV-AC
   C. EV/PV
   D. EV/AC
   E. EAC-AC

Answer: C

Question 432
Which of the following statements are false regarding the
administrative closure procedure?
   A. The administrative closure procedure is an output of the close
      project process
   B. The administrative closure procedure addresses the terms and
      conditions of the contract for contract closure
   C. The administrative closure procedure addresses the completion
      or exit criteria for the project
   D. The administrative closure procedure describes the procedure to
      transfer the project products or services to production and/ or
      operations
   E. The administrative closure procedure addresses the stakeholders
      approval requirements

Answer: B

Question 433
Contract file and formal acceptance and closure are outputs of which
processes?
   A. Contract closure
   B. Contract administration
   C. Information distribution
   D. Manage stakeholders
   E. Performance reporting

Answer: A

Question 434
Product verification is usually performed in the closing process. Which
of the following statements are true?
   A. Product verification is performed during the close project process
   B. Product verification provides management with information
      about how effectively the seller is achieving the contractual
      objectives
   C. Product verification is a method for quantifying qualitative data
      to minimize the effect of biases during select sellers
   D. Product verification includes samples of the suppliers previous
      products for the purpose of providing a way to evaluate a
      supplier's capabilities

Answer: A

Question 435
You are in the process of controlling changes to project cost baseline.
Which of the following is the LEAST helpful input?
  A. Work performance information
  B.   Project funding requirements
  C.   Performance measurements
  D.   Performance reports
  E.   Project management plan

Answer: C

Question 436
A WBS can be used foe all of the following EXCEPT:
  A. Describe functional managers for each team member
  B. Manage/ control scope creep
  C. Communicate with customers
  D. Help new team members understand their roles

Answer: A

Question 437
Recommended corrective actions are an input to which process?
  A. Integrate change control
  B. Direct and manage project execution
  C. Scope verification
  D. Scope control
  E. Schedule development

Answer: A

Question 438
You are the project manager at a large accounting firm in the United
States. Your current project involves auditing the financial statements
of a Fortune 100 company. You are currently utilizing network
diagrams to track and schedule the execution of various auditing tasks
through out the project.
You are performing a backward pass analysis of the project schedule.
It is important for you to examine activities that have _________
slack?
    A. Negative
    B. Forward
    C. Backward
    D. Zero
    E. Positive

Answer: A

Question 439
Which of the following objectives is LEAST likely accomplish by
implementing a project-wide application of the configuration
management system?
  A. Provides a mechanism to communicate changes to stakeholders
  B. Provides opportunities to improve the project by considering the
     impact of each change
  C. Provides a method to identify and manage risks
  D. Establishes a method to identify and request changes to project
     baseline

Answer: C

Question 440
Your company is making a strategy shift: form being focused on
fulfilling customer requests for becoming the best cost dairy producer
in industry. Its existing cost manufacturing cost system, however fails
to capture the costs associated with handling special flavors, small
production orders, and complex delivery and order processing options.
Hence you've been assigned to supervise an existing project to
develop a new time-drive, activity-based costing system that will
capture the full complexity of the company's operations and gives
managers new insights into the profitability orders, products, and
customers. Senior management will use the information to enhance
process efficiencies, negotiating new terms with customers, and
attempt to win new business.
The project timeline is very aggressive and a lot is at stake with this
project. Hence, every week you report on the progress and status of
the project to all the necessary stakeholders and sponsors. Your
project team has already completed all the initial and project planning
activities and received sign-off and approvals on the project charter,
project scope, and detailed work packages. Your project team is in the
process of completing all the work packages. Te project timeline is
very aggressive, and your project has the SPI of 1.2 and CPI of 1.3. A
final review of the project deliverables has been scheduled foe the end
of the month.
Unfortunately, as your project near completion, you are informed that
your project is being cancelled since the resulting product is
unacceptable and does not meet the business needs of the
organization. All the resources on your project are being reassigned to
another project. Which of the following is the MOST likely cause of this
scenario?
    A. The project charter did not provide enough details regarding the
        project goals prior to sign-off
    B. The project was behind schedule and plagued with cist overruns
   C. A key stakeholder was not sufficiently involved in the project
   D. Your project resources were required on a separate project
   E. A project status was not properly communicated to the
      interested parties

Answer: C

Question 441
Which of the following calculates how much additional budget is
required in order to complete the project, assuming the current project
performance to date?
   A. CV
   B. EV
   C. ETC
   D. VAC
   E. EAC

Answer: C

Question 442
Which of the following is most likely to require a rebaselining of the
cost baseline in order to provide a realistic measure of performance?
     A. Change requests
     B. Revised cost estimates
     C. Budget updates
     D. Cost management plan update
     E. Corrective actions

Answer: C

Question 443
All of the following are FALSE regarding bar charts EXCEPT:
     A. Bar charts are generally better at illustrating the resource
         trade-offs compared with network diagrams
     B. Bar charts are generally better at illustrating progress or status
         compared with network diagrams
     C. Bar charts are generally better at illustrating critical paths
         compared with network diagrams
     D. Bar charts are generally better at illustrating logical relationship
         compared with network diagrams

Answer: A

Question 444
All of the following statements are true regarding the cost control
process EXCEPT:
    A. Prevent authorize changes from being included in the cost
       baseline
    B. Inform stakeholders from authorize changes
    C. Monitor cost performance and understand cost variances
    D. Changes are accurately reflected in the project scope

Answer: D

Question 445
You have been assigned to a project to build the largest U.S. natural
gas pipeline project in more than 20 years. The proposed 1,350-mile,
42-inch diameter pipeline will provide valuable infrastructure allowing
producers in the Rocky Mountain region to deliver their natural gas to
attractive markets in the Midwest and northeastern parts of the U.S.
You are in the process of developing the schedule for the project and
you have given the following activity duration estimates. However the
project sponsor would like to share a few weeks off the project
duration. Which activity should you shorten in order to reduce the
overall duration of the project?




   A.   Activity   Start-U
   B.   Activity   W-End
   C.   Activity   T-S
   D.   Activity   Start-S
   E.   Activity   T-X

Answer: B

Question 446
You are a project manager at a real estate company that develops and
manages commercial, retail and residential properties in United States
and Europe. As a company continues to grow, the company's IT
infrastructure is unable to meet business needs of organization.
Specifically, you have been assigned to upgrade the company's IT
infrastructure. Specifically, your team has been asked to implement a
corporate general ledger system, improve accounting and real estate
processes, develop and implement lease tracking system, and
implement HR and payroll systems and perform diagnostics and
monthly closures.
Your project team has already completed all the initiating / project
planning activities and received sign-off approvals on the project
charter, project scope, and detailed work packages. Your project team
is in the process of completing all the work packages.
However, your client has just file a change request to add additional
reporting functionality to the IT application. Fortunately you have
already determined that this functionality will only add one week to the
critical path. To accommodate with the request, you've determined
that you could compress the schedule to recover one extra week.
Which of the following should you perform NEXT?
    A. Implement the change request
    B. Consult the project sponsor before taking action
    C. Investigate other options on how to implement the change
       requests with minimal impact to the project
    D. Evaluate the impact to the change request on the other project
       constraints
    E. Inform the client the impact of the change

Answer: B

Question 447
All of the following are reporting techniques used in the Cost control
process EXCEPT:
    A. Cost-benefit analysis
    B. Earned value technique
    C. Trend analysis
    D. Variance analysis

Answer: A

Question 448
With respect to value analysis which of the following is the portion of
the approved cost estimate that has been budgeted for an activity
during a certain time period?
   A. Planned value (PV)
   B. Earned value (EV)
   C. Actual cost (AC)
   D. Cost variance (CV)
Answer: A

Question 449
You are in the process of reviewing all change requests and controlling
changes to deliverables and organizational process asset. All of the
following are inputs you need EXCEPT:
    A. Recommended defect repair
    B. Requested changes
    C. Project charter
    D. Work performance information
    E. Project management plan

Answer: C

Question 450
Which of the following are true regarding statistical perform quality
control?
   A. Special causes are the result of variances that are always
      present in process
   B. Special causes are the result of variances that are linked to
      unusual events
   C. Random causes are the result of variances that are always
      present in he process
   D. Random causes are the result of variances that are linked to
      unusual events

Answer: B, C

Question 451
You are a project manager responsible for constructing a new sports
arena in preparation for upcoming Olympics. Construction begins on a
project over a year ago. Stakeholders of the project want a status
report on the performance of the project to the date. You have
obtained the following measurement:
BAC=500, ETC=200, PV=500, AC=200, EV=300, CPI=1.5
You believe the type of variances that have occurred on the project to
date to be atypical. Based on the information above what will be the
EAC for the project?
   A. 400
   B. 250
   C. 300
   D. 333.33
   E. 200
Answer: A

Question 452
All of the following statements are true except:
    A. Recommended corrective actions, recommended corrective
       actions, and recommended defect repairs are outputs of
       integrated change control process
    B. None of the choices are correct
    C. Recommended corrective actions, recommended corrective
       actions, and recommended defect repairs are inputs of
       integrated change control process
    D. Recommended corrective actions, recommended corrective
       actions, and recommended defect repairs are outputs of monitor
       and control project work process


Answer: A

Question 453
Which of the following are true regarding project scope management?
  A. Scope verification involves subdividing the major project
     deliverables into small more manageable components
  B. None of the statements are correct
  C. Scope planning involves developing a detailed project scope
     statement as a basis of future project decision
  D. Scope definition involves creating a project scope management
     plan that document how the project scope will be defined and
     controlled
  E. Scope control involves formalizing the acceptance of project
     deliverables

Answer: B

Question 454
Inspections are a tool of perform quality process. They may also be
called?
   A. Sampling
   B. monitoring
   C. trend analysis
   D. audit
   E. walkthroughs

Answer: E, D
Question 455
You are a project manager responsible for constructing a new sports
arena in preparation for upcoming Olympics. Construction begins on a
project over a year ago. Stakeholders of the project want a status
report on the performance of the project to the date.
Unfortunately you are afraid to tell stakeholder that project is coming
in significantly behind schedule. In fact schedule delays are so severe
that the rebaselining of the project is required. Which of the following
statements are true?
   A. Rebaselining should be a normal mode of controlling the
       schedule
   B. Resource leveling techniques should not be used to rebaseline
       the schedule
   C. Historical data are preserved when you rebaseline the schedule
   D. Approval from all stakeholder is required prior to rebaseline the
       schedule
   E. None of the statement are correct

Answer: E

Question 456
Which of the following statement are correct regarding managing
stakeholders except:
   A. Managing stakeholders increases the likelihood that the project
      will not veer off track due to unresolved stakeholders issue
   B. Tools used to manage stakeholders includes communication
      methods and issue logs
   C. Project manager is usually responsible for stakeholder
      management
   D. The manage stakeholder process is the part of project executing
      process group

Answer: D

Question 457
You are a project manager responsible for constructing a new sports
arena in preparation for upcoming Olympics. Construction begins on a
project over a year ago. Stakeholders of the project want a status
report on the performance of the project to the date. You have
obtained the following measurement:
BAC=500, ETC=200, PV=500, AC=200, EV=300, CPI=1.5
You believe the type of variances that have occurred on the project to
date to be atypical, and except these variances to continue. Based on
the information above what will be the VAC for the project?
   A. 333.33
   B. 133.33
   C. 400
   D. 166.67
   E. 100

Answer: D

Question 458
All of the statements are false regarding variance analysis?
    A. Variance analysis involves comparing actual project to planned
       or expected performance
    B. Variance analysis is a tool of scope analysis
    C. Variance analysis is a toll of schedule control process
    D. Variance analysis involves examining project performance over
       time to determine if the performance is improving or
       deteriorating

Answer: D

Question 459
Which of the following statements are false regarding project time
management?
  A. Schedule development involves estimating type and qualities of
     resources required to perform each schedule activity
  B. Activity definition involves identifying schedule activities that are
     required to meet project deliverables
  C. Schedule control involving changes to project schedule
  D. None of the choices are correct
  E. Activity sequencing involves identifying dependencies among
     schedule activities

Answer: A

Question 460
Which of the following risk management processes are workarounds
identified?
   A. Qualitative risk analysis
   B. Risk identification
   C. Risk response planning
   D. Qualitative risk analysis
  E. Risk monitoring and control

Answer: E

Question 461
All of the following statements are true regarding ground rules except:
    A. Only the project manager is responsible for enforcing the ground
       rules
    B. Ground rules are tool of develop project team process
    C. Ground rules help to improve working relation ship and
       communication
    D. Ground rules are the list of acceptable and unacceptable
       behavior adopted by project team

Answer: A

Question 462
You are the project manager in the I.T department of major hospital.
Your current project involves developing a web based interface for
legacy mainframe software applications. Your current project involves
a scope change. You are documenting the physical characteristics and
functionality of the project, based on this scope change. Which of the
following tool are using?
    A. Change control board
    B. Work result
    C. Configuration management
    D. Corrective actions
    E. Scope update

Answer: C

Question 463
You are in the process of monitoring the various project processes and
their performance. Which of the following are you least concerned with
during the process?
   A. None of the choices are correct
   B. Comparing actual project performance against project
      management plan
   C. Assessing performance to determine whether corrective actions
      are necessary
   D. Monitoring and implementation of approved changes
   E. Providing forecast to update current schedule information

Answer: A
Question 464
You are a project manager for a company that sells online music. Your
project is to develop new content management system that will not
only manage all users purchases and downloads but will automatically
learn the users music interest to make future product
recommendation. In addition your content management system must
scale to support millions of current music downloads a day.
Your team has made a significant progress on the project. You are
preparing the performance of the project to date and have calculated
the following measurement:
PV=4000, EV=3500, AC=3000
Which of the following statement are true?
   A. CV is positive number that implies that your project is under
      budget
   B. CV is a negative number which implies that your project is over
      budget
   C. EAC is negative number which implies that you are spending
      more than originally budgeted
   D. EAC is a positive number that implies that you are spending
      more than originally budgeted

Answer: A

Question 465
One of your friends is project manager in Telecommunication
Company. She is currently managing a project developing a voice over
IP. The gateway offers a comprehensive approach to implementing
high density, carrier class voice over packet gateway applications. She
is in the process of developing the project schedule, and has
determined that the project has 44 critical paths. Which of the
following best describe how the project will be impacted?
    A. Project will require more resources
    B. There is no significant impact from having multiple critical paths
    C. Project risk will increase
    D. Project will cost more

Answer: C

Question 466
Which of the following describes the input to the direct and manage
project execution that is used to bring the project back in line and is
the part of feedback loop?
   A. Corrective action
   B.   Performance reports
   C.   Workarounds
   D.   WBS updates
   E.   Performance update

Answer: A

Question 467
The risk monitoring and control process involves all of the following
except:
   A. Tracking identified risks
   B. Assessing the probability of achieving project objectives
   C. Reanalyzing existing risks
   D. Monitoring residual risks
   E. Monitoring trigger conditions for contingency plan

Answer: B

Question 468
You are project manager at a large multinational company developing
a next generation mobile phone using voice over IP technology. The
project involves significant coordination of resources across multiple
different engineering teams located in various different countries.
Specifically your mobile handset team is based in India, your design
team in U.S.A, and your QA team in Canada.
You are currently in the process of assessing the completion status of
each of the work packages. In order to develop a accurate status of
project, you have asked each of the engineer to report their
completion date for their respective deliverables.
However one of the QA engineer abrasively respond" completion date
for what?" you finally decided to report QA engineer's uncooperative
behavior to his functional manager.
Based on the scenario above, which of the following best describes the
problem?
    A. the work packages were not adequately defined for the project
    B. there was a conflict of interest between your QA engineer and
       your project objective
    C. you did not receive the necessary support from the functional
       manager regarding your project
    D. the QA engineer was acting defensively to mask his inabilities to
       meet his project responsibilities
    E. you should have met with the functional manager the first time
       you encountered problem with this engineer rather than let the
       problem escalate
Answer: A

Question 469
Which of the following statements are false regarding cost and
schedule variances?
   A. None of the choices are correct
   B. Schedule variance will ultimately equal zero when the project is
      completed
   C. The amount of variance of SV and CV value tends to decrease as
      the project reaches completion
   D. The cost variance at the end of the project will be the difference
      between the budget at the completion and the actual amount
      spent

Answer: A

Question 470
The cost of quality often refers to cost to produce a product or service
according to specific quality standards. Which of the following is not
cost associated with the cost quality?
   A. Appraisal cost
   B. Defect cost
   C. Failure cost
   D. Prevention cost

Answer: B

Question 471
You are in the process of controlling changes to the project schedule.
All of the following are the inputs to the process except:
    A. Performance report
    B. Activity list
    C. Schedule management plan
    D. Approved change request
    E. Schedule baseline

Answer: B

Question 472
The applied level of change control is least dependent upon:
  A. Application area
  B. Contract requirements
  C. Complexity of specific project
   D. Stakeholder influences
   E. Context and environment in which project is informed

Answer: D

Question 473
Which of the following is an effective tool to observe trends and results
over a specified period of time?
   A. Control chart
   B. Scatter diagram
   C. Gantt chart
   D. Run chart

Answer: D

Question 474
Which of the following are not situations where pre-assignment of
project team members are known in advance?
   A. Staff assignment are defined in project charter
   B. Project is dependent on the expertise of certain people
   C. Promised as a part of competitive proposal
   D. None of the choices are correct

Answer: D

Question 475
You are in the process of directing the performance of a planned
project activities and managing various technical and organizational
interfaces that exist within your project. All of the following are
required inputs EXCEPT:
   A. Work performance information
   B. Project management plan
   C. Approved change requests, approved defect repair
   D. Approved corrective actions, approved preventive actions
   E. Validated defect repair, administrative closure procedure

Answer: A

Question 476
Which of the following best describes the conflict that arises when a
project team member has dual reporting relationship between a
functional manager and project manager?
    A. Ambiguous jurisdiction
    B. Conflict management
   C. Storming
   D. Matrix organization

Answer: A

Question 477
You are evaluating several different motivational strategies to motivate
your project team. You subscribe to the belief that pray and salary
may prevent job dissatisfaction, but will not lead to long term job
satisfaction. You believe that over the long run pay and salary are NOT
motivators. Which of the following motivational theories are you
applying?
    A. Expectancy theory
    B. Achievement theory
    C. Maslow hierarchy of needs
    D. Hertzberg hygiene theory

Answer: D

Question 478
Which of the following process groups are in loop back relationship
with the other, where each process group serves as inputs to the
other?
   A. Planning and initiation
   B. Planning and execution
   C. Execution and initiation
   D. Execution and controlling

Answer: D

Question 479
You are the project manager for a software company developing
wireless mobile application. You are currently in the Risk Identification
process where you are trying to identify and document all the risks
that might impact your project. You have assemble your experts in
one room for face-to-face discussion.
You intend to use a face-to-face group judgment technique in which
participants generate silently, in writing, responses to a given
question/problem; responses are collected and posted, but not
identified by author, for all to see; responses are openly clarified, often
in a round-robin format, further iterations may follow; and a final set
of responses is established by voting/ranking. Which technique are you
using?
   A. Brainstorming
  B.   Assumption analysis
  C.   Norming group technique
  D.   Diagramming techniques
  E.   Delphi technique

Answer: C

Question 480
According to Maslow's hierarchy of needs in which does the need for
acceptance occurs?
   A. Safety and security
   B. Esteem
   C. Social needs
   D. Self-actualization

Answer: C

Question 481
Which of the following statements are true regarding the project
human resource management processes?
  A. Human resources planning involves obtaining the human
     resources required to complete the project
  B. Develop project team involves obtaining the human resources to
     complete the project
  C. Acquire project team involves identifying and documenting the
     project roles and responsibilities
  D. Manage project team involves creating the staffing management
     plan
  E. None of the choices are correct

Answer: E

Question 482
With respect top cost of quality, which of the following individuals
suggested that 85% of the cost of quality is a management problem?
   A. Crosby
   B. Juran
   C. Deming
   D. Ishikawa

Answer: C

Question 483
You are the project manager responsible for constructing new 100-unit
apartment in downtown Manhattan. As part of construction project,
you are planning to outsource a particular deliverable of your project.
You have created a document that described the product and services
required in detail and have included the necessary reporting
requirements. Which of the following BEAST describes the document
you have just prepared?
   A. RFP
   B. RFQ
   C. Process management plan
   D. Scope definition
   E. Contract SOW

Answer: E

Question 484
Which of the following describes an input to the direct and manage
execution process that consists of documented, authorized requests
for product correction of a defect found during quality inspection?
   A. Implemented preventive actions
   B. Implemented change requests
   C. Approved preventive actions
   D. Approved defect repair
   E. Approved change requests

Answer: D

Question 485
Which of the following LEAST likely describes a weighting system used
in the Select Sellers process?
    A. Select a single seller that will be asked to sign the contract
    B. Ensure that prospective sellers have a clear understanding of the
       requirements
    C. Rank sellers based on seller's past performance and quality
    D. Rank all proposals by weighed evaluation scores

Answer: B

Question 486
You are the project manager for the international contract
manufacturing firm with manufacturing the plants and offices in India,
China and Thailand. Your company design and manufacture various
consumer electronics such as flat screen, television, laptop computers,
monitors, e.t.c.
Your company is in the process of bidding on a project to manufacture
the next generation 128-bit video game console for x-cube station. As
a potential bidder for this project your company must register so that
it is on the qualified seller list. Which of the following statements are
true?
    A. The qualified seller list is an input to the request sellers
       responses and provides information about the project including
       details about the RFP and SOW
    B. The qualified seller list is an input to the select sellers and
       provides information about the sellers
    C. The qualified seller is a tool/technique of a request seller
       response process and provide information about the seller
    D. The qualified seller list is a tool of the request seller responses
       process and are used to ensure that all the prospective sellers
       have a clear understanding of the requirements
    E. The qualified seller list is an input to the select sellers and are
       used to rate and score proposals

Answer: B

Question 487
Which of the following statements are FALSE regarding recognition and
rewards?
   A. Zero sum rewards, that only a limited number of project team
      members can achieve, may undetermined team cohesiveness
      and performance
   B. To be effective, recognition and rewards should be based under
      a person's control
   C. Recognition and rewards should consider cultural differences
   D. None of the choices are correct
   E. Recognition and rewards are tool/ techniques of the develop
      project team process

Answer: D

Question 488
All of the following are another terms of bidder conferences EXCEPT:
   A. Pre-bid conferences
   B. Vendor conferences
   C. Screening conferences
   D. Contractor conferences

Answer: C
Question 489
Which of the following conflict resolution techniques describes a lose-
lose situation where one of the parties involved in the conflict reduces
to discuss the conflict, and hence, a resolution is never achieved
   A. Confrontation
   B. Compromise
   C. Forcing
   D. Withdrawal
   E. Smoothing

Answer: D

Question 490
You are a project manager at java ice cream factory. You are currently
supervising the manufacturing of new flavor ice cream java bean,
burgundy crunch. The manufacturing of this flavor was proceeding as
planned, until a manufacturing error occurred that requires corrective
action to be taken. Ironically the manufacturing error resulted in a new
variant of the flavor.
Product team really thinks that flavor would be a success in a
marketplace. They have asked you to cancel the corrective action, and
integrate this serendipitous discovery in the manufacturing process. As
a project manager you have realized that this has resulted in a change
in project scope. Which of the following statement are FALSE?
   A. Quality inspection are used to determine whether changes to the
      project scope has occurred
   B. Changes to product scope should be reflected in the project
      scope
   C. The performance measurements baselines will be affected by
      changes in the project scope
   D. Changes to the project scope should be reviewed by the CCB

Answer: A

Question 491
You are the project manger at an advertising firm that specializes in
marketing and promotional campaign for athletic shoes. Your company
frequently uses sports celebrities as part of the marketing and
advertising campaigns. Advertising that uses celebrities to influence
consumer's purchasing decisions is an example of what type of power?
   A. Referent power
   B. Exert power
   C. Legitimate power
   D. Coercive power
   E. Punishment power

Answer: A

Question 492
Which of the following statements are FALSE regarding the process
improvement plan?
  A. The process improvement plan is an input to the perform quality
     assurance process
  B. The process improvement plan is an output to the perform
     quality control process
  C. The process improvement plan describes the steps to examine
     processes for waste and non-value added activities
  D. The process improvement plan is a subsidiary of the project
     management plan

Answer: B

Question 493
Which of the following would LEAST likely to be found as part of a
contract?
   A. Warranty, limitation of liability
   B. Independent estimates, evaluation criteria
   C. Roles of responsibilities, pricing and payments
   D. Inflation adjustments, acceptance criteria
   E. Statement of work, schedule

Answer: B

Question 494
You are the project manger at a construction company. Your company
is currently in the process of developing a 500-unit apartment
complex. Your company plans to subcontract all the electrical wiring of
the building to an outside vendor.
The subcontractor's work will involve wiring the building for electrical
power, as well as cable and Internet Ethernet wiring. In which of the
following processes will a contract between the buyer and seller be
created?
    A. Contract administration
    B. Select sellers
    C. Plan purchases and acquisitions
    D. Request seller responses
    E. Plan contracting
Answer: B

Question 495
You are the project manager of a company that is building ATM
software for a large bank and financial institutions. You have been told
that the ATM software must meet very stringent quality standards.
Including rigorous auditing of all transactions, ability to recover in case
of software/ hardware errors, and fraud detection/analysis and robust
two-factor authentication.
The ATM system is currently in production, when a quality problem is
identified with a PIN card reader. This problem will require with a
downtime of the manufacturing process while networks of the unit are
performed. Fortunately, the units have not been shipped, to customers
yet. Which of the following best describes the cost of quality
associated with this problem?
   A. Appraisal costs
   B. Rework costs
   C. External failure cost
   D. Prevention costs
   E. Internal failure costs

Answer: E

Question 496
Which of the following is NOT one of the five project management
process groups?
   A. Executing
   B. None of the choices are correct
   C. Monitoring and controlling
   D. Planning
   E. Closing

Answer: B

Question 497
You are involved in monitoring specific project results to determine
whether they comply with relevant quality standards. You are using a
control chart to illustrate how a process is behaving over time. You've
constructed your control chart and determined that all the data points
are within the upper and lower control limits of the chart. In addition,
seven consecutive data points are observed to be on the one side of
the mean. Which of the following is your BEST plan of action?
   A. Compare the results from the lat quality management plan
   B. Adjust the mean based on the observed data points
  C. No additional action is needed, as the process is within control
  D. Identify the assignable causes

Answer: D

Question 498
You are currently in the process of acquiring your project team and are
working with functional managers to ensure that the project receives
the appropriate staff during the required time frame. Which of the
following BEST describes the tool/ technique you are using?
    A. Pre-assignment
    B. Acquisition
    C. Virtual teams
    D. Negotiation

Answer: D

Question 499
Consider the project integration management knowledge area. Which
of the following process are included?
   A. Risk identification
   B. Performance reporting
   C. Integrated reporting
   D. Direct and manage project execution
   E. Human resource planning

Answer: D

Question 500
Project information can be shared by tam members and stakeholders
through a variety of methods. Which of the following are NOT
considered information retrieval systems?
   A. Electronic databases
   B. Videoconferencing
   C. Project management software
   D. Electronic mail
   E. Manual filing systems

Answer: B, D

Question 501
Which of the following describes the assumptions made by the theory
X style of management?
   A. People can handle responsibility with creativity and ingenuity
   B. People have no ambition, wants no responsibility and would
      rather follow than lead
   C. People work only for money and security
   D. People will be committed to their objectives if rewards are in
      place that address higher needs such as self-fulfillment

Answer: B, C

Question 502
Information retrieval systems, information distribution methods, and
communication skills are tools/ techniques of which of the following
processes?
   A. Information distribution
   B. Manage stakeholders
   C. Performance reporting
   D. Communications planning

Answer: A

Question 503
Which of the following project quality management process is within
the executing process group?
   A. Perform quality control
   B. Quality planning
   C. None of the choices are correct
   D. Perform quality assurance

Answer: D

Question 504
You are the project manager at a construction company. Your
company is in the process of developing a 500-unit apartment
complex. Your company has subcontracted all the electrical wiring of
the building to XYZ Electrical. The subcontractor's work involved wiring
the building for electrical power, as well as cable and Internet/Ethernet
wiring. The subcontractor has just completed the work, and you are in
process of inspecting his work.
However, you've just discovered that the subcontractor forgot to
install the Cat-5 Ethernet/Internet cabling throughout the building. The
subcontractor's performance did not meeting the contractor
requirements. Which of the following statements are true?
   A. You are in the quality assurance process, and performed a
       quality audit of the contractor's work
  B. You are in the contract administration process, and performed a
     contract audit to verify the contractor's work
  C. You are in the contract administration process, and performed a
     variance analysis to verify the completeness of the contractor's
     work
  D. You are in the scope verification process, and performed a
     quality audit of the contractor's work
  E. You are in the performance reporting process, and performed a
     performance review of the contractor's work

Answer: A

Question 505
The contract management plan is an output of which process?
  A. Plan contracting
  B. Request sellers
  C. Plan purchases and acquisitions
  D. Select sellers
  E. Contract administration

Answer: D

Question 506
Your are in the process o reviewing offers and choosing among
potential sellers. All of the following are tools you can use except:
   A. methods to evaluate sellers on past performance and contractual
      compliance
   B. methods for establishing minimum requirements for performance
      of one or more evaluation criteria when slecting a prospective
      seller
   C. methods of preparing own independent estimates of costs
   D. methods to review seller progress to date
   E. methods to clarify the structure and requirements of the
      contracts

Answer: D

Question 507
You have just completed the progress planning process group and are
ready to begin the project executing process group. You will need to
perform all the following executing processes except:
   A. collect and distribute project performance information
   B. improve competencies of team members
   C. make necessary information available to stakeholder in time
      manner
   D. obtain information , quotation and proposals
   E. review offer and select seller

Answer: A

Question 508
Which of the following are not the direct result of managing the team?
  A. Updating and staffing the management plan
  B. Developing input to performance appraisals
  C. Recording the lessons learned
  D. Identifying the recourse requirements
  E. Submitting change request and resolving issues

Answer: D

Question 509
You are in the process of obtaining necessary human resource to
complete the project. All the following are tools you can use except:
  A. Negotiation
  B. Acquisition
  C. Virtual team
  D. Pre assignment
  E. General management skills

Answer: E

Question 510
Which of the following types of contracts requires the greatest amount
of time to monitor and audit?
   A. T&M
   B. Fixed price
   C. CPFF
   D. FPIF

Answer: C

Question 511
All of the following statements are true regarding the communications
management plan EXCEPT:
    A. The communications management plan should be formal and
       highly detailed
   B. The communications management plan is an input to the
      information distribution process
   C. The communications management plan is an output of the
      communications planning process
   D. The communications management plan provides information on
      stakeholder communication requirements and glossary of
      common terminology

Answer: A

Question 512
You have been assigned to a project to build a large 30-story
condominium in Las Vegas. The condominium will feature luxurious
amenities like state of the art work-out facilities, conference centers,
valet services, maid services, spas, gourmet dining and resort style
pools.
You have already finished the planning processes and have already
begun construction. However, during project execution, a large
number of changes are being made to the project. Which of the
following BEST response to these changes?
    A. Hold off until changes are determined, and then create a new
       project schedule
    B. Implement approved changes as necessary, and adjust project
       management plan and baselines
    C. Implement changes that have only been approved by
       management
    D. Ask for additional resources in order to implement changes
    E. Await management approval before making any changes

Answer: B

Question 513
You in the project executing process group, and would like to confirm
the implementation of approved change request, corrective actions,
and defect repairs. Which of the following tool/technique can you
leverage?
   A. Quality audits
   B. Process analysis
   C. Benchmarking
   D. Design of experiments
   E. Cost-benefit analysis

Answer: A
Question 514
Which of the following processes best describes the project human
resource management knowledge area?
   A. Initiation, develop project team, acquire project team, develop
      project team
   B. Initiation, activity resource planning, acquire project team,
      develop project team
   C. Initiation, develop project team, acquire project team, develop
      project team, manage project team
   D. Acquire project team, activity resource estimation, develop
      project team, manage project team

Answer: A

Question 515
You are currently in the marker for the new car. You are debating
between two different cars. Car ABC is highly reliable car with an
excellent track record. However, car ABC lacks some premium
equipment, such as high-end audio system and sports suspension.
On the other hand, car XYZ comes standard with various premium
equipment including a sports suspension and high-end audio system.
However, car XYZ is much les reliable and would require more
frequent maintenance and repairs. How would you characterized the
two cars?
   A. Car ABC is a low grade, high quality car while Car XYZ is a high
      grade, high quality car
   B. Car ABC is a low grade, high quality car while Car XYZ is a high
      grade, high quality car
   C. Car ABC is a low grade, high quality car while Car XYZ is a high
      grade, low quality car
   D. Car ABC is a high grade, high quality car while Car XYZ is a high
      grade, low quality car
   E. Car ABC is a high grade, low quality car while Car XYZ is a low
      grade, high quality car

Answer: C

Question 516
You are a project manager for the manufacture of children's toys. Your
project team is in the process of designing a new children toy for new
year Christmas season.
Your project team has worked together for the last six months, and
has become a self directed team, with little, if any supervision
required. A new member has just added to the team. Which of the
following statements are true?
    A. introduction to the new team member will cause the develop
       team project process to start over again at the storming stage
    B. introduction to the new team member have no effect on develop
       team project process. The team will continue in the performing
       stage
    C. introduction to the new team member will cause the develop
       team project process to start over again at the forming stage
    D. introduction to the new team member will cause the develop
       team project process to start over again at the norming stage



Answer: C

Question 517
Which of the following statement are false?
  A. The qualified seller list describes those sellers who are asked to
     submit a proposals
  B. Procurement document package is a buyer prepared formal
     request sent to each seller and is the basis upon which a seller
     prepare a bid
  C. Qualified seller list and procurement document package are
     output of request seller responses process
  D. Contract are seller prepared document that describes the seller
     ability to provide requested services

Answer: D

Question 518
Which of the following techniques do project manager used most often
to resolve conflicts?
   A. Compromise
   B. Withdrawal
   C. Smoothing
   D. Forcing
   E. Confronting

Answer: E

Question 519
You are the part of construction project team responsible for
developing a new stadium. The project has been ongoing for the past
several months. Your project team has just completed the initial
project budget and schedule and is ensure what to do next. Which of
the following would you recommend as the NEXT BEST action to
perform?
   A. Identify the quality standards
   B. Start project iterations
   C. Identify the project risks
   D. Develop the WBS
   E. Develop the PDM

Answer: A

Question 520
Which of the following statements regarding the project charter is
FALSE?
  A. The project charter grants authority to the project manager to
     initiate the project
  B. The project charter describes the business needs for the project,
     such as marketing demand, legal requirements, technological
     advances.
  C. The project charter provides the project manager with functional
     power over personnel
  D. The project charter should not be directly published by the
     project manager.

Answer: C

Question 521
Which of the following documents initiates a project and authorizes the
project manager to assign organizational resources to the project?
   A. RFQ document
   B. Work breakdown structure
   C. Project plan
   D. RFB document
   E. Project charter

Answer: E

Question 522
Which of the following best describes the following organizational
structure?
   A.   Balanced matrix Org
   B.   Weak matrix Org
   C.   Projectized Org
   D.   Functional Org
   E.   Strong matrix Org

Answer: B

Question 523
You are currently the project manager for a software development
project, developing a next generation data-mining tool. Your team is
developing a new software product that will help customers better
manage large volumes of data, especially for data reporting purposes.
Midway, through the project, your engineer decide to add additional
reporting functionality to better analyze correlate data. Although this
functionality was NOT part of the original project plan, this feature
seems like it could be a useful feature for the customer. This is an
example of which of the following?
   A. Gold plating
   B. Crashing the schedule
   C. Inadequate project planning
   D. Scope creep
   E. Fast tracking

Answer: A

Question 524
Which of the following statements are true regarding the project
statement of work?
   A. The project statement of work is one of the outputs to the
      develop project charter process and develop preliminary scope
      statement process
   B. The project statement of work describes the processes and
      procedures for conducting work and knowledge base for storing
      and retrieving information
   C. The project statement of work describes the factors that
      influence the project's success, including company culture,
      marketplace conditions, stakeholder risk tolerance etc
   D. The project statement of work is one of the outputs to the
      develop Preliminary Project Scope Statement process

Answer: A

Question 525
You have been recently hired to be a project manager at a bio-tech
company to develop anew drug to treat pancreatic cancer. The project
requires significant coordination across multiple departments from
R&D to manufacturing.
You've attempt to gain the cooperation of chief scientist (who reports
to the V.P. of R&D) within the R&D department. You need her
assistance to answer some questions regarding the clinical testing
process of this new drug. However, the chief scientist is un-interested
in your project and provides little or no feed back to your questions.
Since your project is NOT one of her priorities, she's been rather
unresponsive to your questions. What should you do in this situation?
    A. Inform the VP of R&D of the performance issues. Establish the
       expectations of the chief scientist by communicating to your
       project requirements to the VP of R&D. cooperation from the VP
       of R&D is necessary in order to ensure performance from the
       chief scientist
    B. Clearly define and establish the chief scientist duties and
       communicate to her that you re expecting him to meet
       expectations. Inform the chief scientist of the impact on lost
       customers and declining company revenues if she misses her
       deadlines.
    C. Communicate to the chief scientist that you'll be reporting her
       performance to the VP of R&D at the completion of the project.
    D. Negotiate with the VP of R&D to establish expectations of the
       chief scientist and request to participate ion the chief scientist's
       annual performance review
Answer: D

Question 526
Which of the following is NOT a valid reason to authorize a project?
  A. Social needs
  B. Legal requirements
  C. Technological advance
  D. Risk identification

Answer: D

Question 527
One of your friends is a project manager at a computer security
company. She is currently managing a project for the development of
a NAC (network admissions control) appliance that uses the network
infrastructure to enforce security policy compliance on all devices
seeking to access network computing resources, thereby limiting
damage from emerging security threats. The NAC appliance will
provide with self-contained endpoint assessment, policy management,
and remediation services. The company had performed a similar
project a couple years ago.
This is critical project fro the company, and he is under tremendous
pressure to deliver the project. Unfortunately, he is new in the
company, and the project is growing in size everyday. He is starting to
feel overwhelmed by the project. What is his BEST course of action?
    A. Ask for additional resources from his supervisor
    B. Ask the previous project manager for assistance
    C. Obtain the historical records and guidance from the PMO
    D. Contract from an outside vendor to provide the necessary
       technical expertise

Answer: C

Question 528
Which of the following best describes progressive elaboration?
  A. Process of soliciting proposals from prospective sellers and
     vendors
  B. Process of starting a new task prior to the completion of current
     project tasks
  C. None of the choices are correct
  D. Process of identifying the characteristics of products

Answer: D
Question 529
You are the project manager at Day-Old donuts a rapidly growing
franchise selling premium donuts at a discount. Currently, your
company is planning on opening additional stores throughout Europe.
Your company is evaluating different areas for expansion including
France, Germany and England. Your steering committee used a
weighted score model and found that in England with a score of 75,
provided the best opportunities for expansion. Which of the following
statements are true?
   A. Weighted scoring models are constrained optimization method,
      and is an input to the initiation process group
   B. Weighted scoring models are constrained optimization method,
      and is tool/ technique of the initiation process group
   C. Weighted scoring models are benefit measurement method, and
      is input to the initiation process group
   D. Weighted scoring models are benefit measurement method, and
      is tool/ technique of the initiation process group

Answer: D

Question 530
When should a project manager be assigned to a project?
  A. When a stakeholder select a project manager
  B. After the project planning has be done
  C. During the develop preliminary project scope statement process
  D. After the WBS document has developed
  E. During the develop project charter phase of the project

Answer: E

Question 531
According to the PMI, who should develop the project charter?
   A. None of the choices are correct
   B. Project initiator external to the project organization
   C. Project sponsor that is part of the project organization
   D. The project manager
   E. The customer

Answer: B

Question 532
In which of the following processes in the initial process group is one
responsible for producing a high-level definition of the project and
documenting the project requirements, deliverables and method of
acceptance?
   A. Scope planning
   B. Develop preliminary project scope statement
   C. Develop project management plan
   D. Develop project charter
   E. Create WBS

Answer: B

Question 533
You are the project manager for an information technology division of
a large financial services firm in the United States. Your company
offers a web based trading platform that provides options and futures
trading for U.S commodities markets. Due to the rise in popularity of
futures and options trading, your company has grown rapidly. In fact,
due to rapid growth, the company's I.T. infrastructure is unable to
meet the growing demands.
To keep up with the demands you have been assigned the
responsibility of upgrading the company's network and company's
infrastructure. You have been asked to calculate the payback period
for the project that is to be completed in the next 24 months.
    A. 4.5 years
    B. 4 years
    C. 5.5 years
    D. 3 years
    E. 2 years

Answer: B

Question 534
Which of the following terms best describe the approach used by
organizations to treat aspects of ongoing operations as project in order
to apply project management technique to them?
   A. Product management
   B. Management by projects
   C. Program management
   D. Operations project management

Answer: B

Question 535
Which of the following statements are true regarding the difference
between a project expediter and coordinator roles?
   A. There are no functional differences between the project
      expediter and coordinator roles
   B. The project coordinator cannot make or enforce decisions
   C. The project coordinator reports to higher-level manager
   D. The project expediter van make and enforce decisions
   E. The project expediter has more authority than project
      coordinator

Answer: C

Question 536
You are the project manager at Happy Coffee Cafe, a rapidly growing
franchise selling premium blended coffee. Currently, your company is
planning on opening additional stores throughout Europe. Your
company is evaluating different areas for expansion, including France,
Germany, and England. Based on your market analysis, you have
obtained the following information:
England-IRR (33%), payback period (1.5 years)
France-IRR (45%), payback period (1.1 years)
Germany-IRR (36%), payback period (0.75 years)

  A. England since IRR is lowest
  B. Germany since payback period is shortest
  C. France since the IRR is the highest
  D. England since the payback period is the longest

Answer: C

Question 537
Which of the following statements are true regarding the project
charter?
   A. The project charter describes the business needs of the project
      and should be published under the name of project manager
   B. The project charter includes the project goals and objectives and
      should be published under the name of project sponsor
   C. The project charter includes resources and cost estimates and
      should be published by a manager external to the project
   D. The project charter includes resources and cost estimates and
      should be published under the name of project manager
   E. None of the statements are true

Answer: C

Question 538
Suppose your company has acquired a high end server three years ago
for $100,000. The server's current book value is $20,000. The $20,000
book value sis best considered a:
   A. Variable cost
   B. Indirect cost
   C. Sunk cost
   D. Direct cost
   E. Fixed cost

Answer: C

Question 539
You are the project manger at a utility company. Due to the recent rise
in the cost of petroleum, your organization is exploring cheaper,
alternatives forms of energy. You are in the process of developing the
project charter. All of the following are tools/ techniques that you can
use to develop the project charter EXCEPT:
    A. Project management methodologies
    B. PMIS
    C. Decomposition
    D. Project selection methods
    E. Expert judgment

Answer: C

Question 540
Which of the following statements are true regarding decision models
using multi objective programming algorithms?
   A. These are tool/techniques in the Quantitative risk analysis
      process
   B. These are benefit measurement methods
   C. These are input to the develop project charter process
   D. These are constrained optimization methods/ mathematical
      models
   E. These are inputs to the develop preliminary project scope
      statement process

Answer: D

Question 541
You are in the process of developing an approximation of the costs of
the resources needed to complete each schedule activity. Which of the
following statements are FALSE regarding this process?
  A. Activity resource estimation involves determining the quantity
     and type of resources required (staff, equipment, material, etc)
     and is loosely coordinated with the cost estimating
  B. Schedule activity duration estimates may affect cost estimates
     that have time-sensitive costs
  C. The staffing management plan is an input to this process and
     describes the type and quantity of resources required to
     complete project work
  D. None of the choices are correct
  E. Activity duration estimating will affect cost estimates when the
     project budget includes an allowance for cost financing

Answer: C

Question 542
Which of the following best describes the calculations of late finish
dates and late start dates for the uncompleted portions of all network
activities?
   A. Backward pass
   B. Baseline
   C. Schedule variance
   D. Forward pass
   E. Precedence diagramming method

Answer: A

Question 543
You are an information security project manager responsible for
securing your cooperate network. Due to new regulations mandated by
the Sarbanes-Oxley act your company's upper management has
tasked you with securing the company's network infrastructure.
Unfortunately, you lacked detailed knowledge regarding firewall and
IPS-related technologies. You are relying on an outside security
consulting firm to provide you with expert judgment regarding these
technologies. You are trying to forecast how often you'll require their
expert judgment during your project. Expert judgment is a tool/
technique in all of the following processes EXCEPT:
   A. Develop project charter
   B. Develop preliminary project scope statement
   C. Develop project management plan
   D. Scope planning
   E. Schedule development

Answer: E
Question 544
Which of the following process takes the activities that are defined in
the WBS and activity list, and accesses the amount of time required to
complete these activities?
   A. Activity duration estimation
   B. Activity definition
   C. Activity sequencing
   D. Schedule development

Answer: A

Question 545
Which of the following processes utilize rolling wave planning as a tool/
technique?
   A. Create WBS
   B. Activity sequencing
   C. Scope planning
   D. Activity definition
   E. Scope definition

Answer: D

Question 546
A risk impact scale that uses rank-ordered values as very low, low,
moderate, and high is considered:
   A. Probability scale impact
   B. Non linear scale
   C. An ordinal scale
   D. Linear scale
   E. A cardinal scale

Answer: C

Question 547
A poorly defined staffing management plan will LEAST directly impact:
   A. Ability to estimate costs associated with schedule activities
   B. Ability improve competencies of team members
   C. Ability to obtain human resources needed to complete project
   D. Ability track project team performance
   E. Ability to create the roles and responsibilities list needed to
      complete the project

Answer: E
Question 548
The detailed project scope statement includes all of the following
EXCPET:
  A. Project objectives, project scope description, project
     requirements
  B. Fund limitation, cost estimate, configuration management
     requirements
  C. Project specification, approval requirements, WBS
  D. Project boundaries, project deliverables, project acceptance
     criteria
  E. Constraints/ assumptions, initial defined risks, schedule
     milestones

Answer: C

Question 549
Supporting details for activity cost estimates should include all of the
following EXCEPT:
    A. Range of possible estimates
    B. Cost baseline
    C. Description of project scope of work
    D. Documentation of constraints and assumptions
    E. Documentation of how the estimates were developed

Answer: B

Question 550
You have been hired as a project manager for a local bank. Bank
wants to develop and design the custom online bill pay software so
that its customer can pay bills online. You are ready to begin the
activity duration estimates for your project.
Two years ago you were involved in prior project where a team of ten
programmers were able to create similar bill pay software in 180 days.
Therefore in estimating the duration of this new project, you decided
to use 180 days as an estimate. This is an example of which type of
estimating technique?
    A. Reserve time
    B. Decomposition
    C. Qualitatively based duration
    D. Analogous estimating

Answer: D
Question 551
All of the following can be used to estimate contingency reserves
during activity duration estimating except:
    A. Percentage of estimated activity duration
    B. Fixed number of work periods
    C. Quantitative schedule risk analysis
    D. None of the choices are correct

Answer: A

Question 552
Which of the following processes is involved with allocating the overall
cost estimate to individual work activities?
   A. Cost budgeting
   B. Cost estimating
   C. Cost control
   D. Activity resource estimating

Answer: A

Question 553
You are in the process of analyzing activity sequence, durations,
resource requirement, and schedule constraints in order to create the
project schedule. Which of the following is least helpful input in this
process?
   A. Activity attributes, project schedule network diagram
   B. Activity duration estimates, risk register
   C. Activity resource requirement, resource calendars
   D. Schedule baseline, performance reports
   E. Project scope statements, activity list

Answer: D

Question 554
Risks that may affect the project can be identified and organized into
risk categories. Which of the following is a not possible risk category?
   A. External
   B. Technical
   C. None of the choices are correct
   D. Organizational
   E. Environmental

Answer: C
Question 555
Risk diagramming techniques include all of the following except:
   A. Influence diagram
   B. Ishikawa diagram
   C. Fishbone diagram
   D. Pareto charts
   E. Process flow charts

Answer: D

Question 556
You are in the process of identifying and documenting risk project. You
are using various information gathering techniques to identify the
project risks. All of the following are information gathering techniques
except:
   A. Delphi technique
   B. SWOT analysis
   C. Brainstorming
   D. Assumption analysis
   E. Root cause identification

Answer: D

Question 557
You are a project manager at construction company, assigned to
repaint the 30-story building. One of the initial tasks are to scrape the
original paint off the building and then to prime the building. But
before the building can be primed, the original paint must be scraped
off the building.
However priming can begin while scraping is underway. The two tasks
can progress in parallel. Which of the following relationship type best
describes this dependency between scraping and priming?
    A. Start to finish
    B. Start to start
    C. Finish to start
    D. Finish to finish

Answer: B

Question 558
Which of the following are true regarding project risk management?
  A. Qualitative risk analysis involves prioritizing risk by their impact
     and probability of occurrence
  B. None of the statements are true
   C. Risk management involves determining which risk might effect
      the project
   D. Qualitative risk analysis involves numerically analyzing the
      impacts of identified risks
   E. Risks identification involves deciding how to plan and and
      execute risk management activities

Answer: A

Question 559
You are using three point estimating technique to estimate the
estimate of a scheduled activity. Which of the following statement are
true given the following data:
[Pessimistic=100 days] [Optimistic=40 days] [Most likely=65 days]
            Assuming a beta distribution you calculate that the
            duration average=66.6 days and duration
            variance=100.
            Assuming a triangular distribution you calculate that the
            duration average=68.33 days, and duration
            variance=151.38

   A. The triangular distribution gives a more optimistic and more
      optimistic and aggressive value for the mean
   B. The triangular distribution gives an estimate with larger
      uncertainty
   C. The data distribution gives a more pessimistic and more
      conservative value for the mean
   D. None of the statements are true

Answer: B

Question 560
You are the project manger assigned to perform seismic retro-fitting
on an old office building. You are trying to estimate the costs for this
project. You start by assigning the costs associated with each of the
project activities. Then you sum up all the individual costs into a final
cost estimate. Which type of cost estimating technique id you see?
   A. ADM
   B. Bottom-up estimating
   C. PDM
   D. Parametric estimating
   E. Analogous estimating

Answer: B
Question 561
You are the project manager for a software company that develops
children's video games. You have been assigned to develop a new
game that makes mathematics fun for children. You need to gather
necessary information to write the project scope management plan.
Which of the following information do you NOT need as inputs to your
current process?
   A. Project charter
   B. Organizational process assets
   C. Preliminary project scope statement
   D. Templates, forms, and standards
   E. Enterprise environmental factors

Answer: D

Question 562
Which of the following statements are true regarding the critical path
of a project schedule?
   A. Any project activity with a float time of zero or greater is
      considered a critical path tasks
   B. Any project activity with a positive float time is considered a
      critical path tasks
   C. None of the statements are true
   D. Any project activity with a float time that equals zero is
      considered a critical path tasks

Answer: D

Question 563
All of the following statements regarding the risk breakdown structure
(RBS) is true EXCEPT:
    A. None of the choices are correct
    B. The RBS lists the categories and sub-categories within which
       risks may arise
    C. The RBS describes the list of identified risks, list of potential
       responses, and root causes of risks
    D. The lowest level of risk breakdown structure can be used as a
       risk checklist
    E. The risk breakdown structure represents a hieratically organized
       representation of identified project risks arranged by risk
       categories

Answer: C
Question 564
You are in the process of estimating the number of work periods that
will be needed to complete individual schedule activities. All of the
following are tools/ techniques you can use EXCEPT:
    A. Estimating duration by multiplying the quantity of work to be
       performed by productivity rate
    B. Estimating duration by calculating the average of three duration
       estimates (most likely, optimistic, pessimistic)
    C. Estimating duration by using contingency reserves
    D. Estimating duration from a previous, similar schedule activity
       based on historical information and expert judgment
    E. Estimating duration by calculating multiple project durations with
       varying sets of activity assumptions using Monte Carlo analysis

Answer: E

Question 565
Which of the following statements regarding Schedule Network
Analysis is true EXCEPT:
  A. Schedule network analysis provides a graphical representation of
     situations showing casual influences, time ordering of events,
     and relationships among variables and outcomes
  B. Schedule network analysis calculates the early and late/finish
     dates and scheduled start/finish dates for uncompleted portions
     of the project schedule activities
  C. Schedule network analysis is a tool/ technique of the schedule
     development process
  D. Schedule network analysis employs various analytical techniques
     such as critical path method, critical chain method, what-if
     analysis, and resource leveling
  E. Schedule network analysis is a technique that generates the
     project schedule

Answer: A

Question 566
Which of the following is typically displayed as a S-shaped curve?
  A. Pareto diagram
  B. Critical path
  C. None of the choices are correct
  D. Resource histogram
  E. Cost baseline
Answer: E

Question 567
Cost aggregation, reserve analysis, funding limit reconciliation, and
parametric estimating are tool/ techniques of which process?
   A. Cost estimating
   B. Cost budgeting
   C. Cost control
   D. Activity duration estimating
   E. Activity resource estimating

Answer: B

Question 568
All of the following statements are true regarding the cost baseline
EXCEPT:
    A. The cost baseline is a part of the project management plan
    B. The cost baseline is usually displayed as a S-shaped curve
    C. Cost baseline is are management control point where budget and
       actual cost are integrated and compared to earned value for
       performance measurement
    D. The cost baseline involves aggregating the estimating cost of
       individual activities or work packages and is an output of the
       cost budgeting process
    E. A project may have multiple cost baseline

Answer: C

Question 569
You are a project manager developing a project plan for the renovation
of historic landmark. You are in the process of performing some risk
planning. your risk management plan should include all of he following
except:
   A. Scoring and interpretation
   B. Methodology
   C. Response to individual risk
   D. Timing
   E. Roles and repomsibilities

Answer: C

Question 570
Planning components are tools of activity definition process. Which of
the following are planning components?
   A.   Activity attributes
   B.   Control accounts
   C.   Milestone list
   D.   Planning package
   E.   Activity list

Answer: B,D

Question 571
Which of the following are the part of WBS dictionary except:
  A. Statement of work to be performed
  B. Code of account identified
  C. Activity attributes
  D. Who is responsible for the work
  E. Schedule milestone

Answer: C

Question 571
All of the following statements regarding decision tree analysis are true
except:
    A. Decision tree is a diagramming technique used to select best
       course of action in situation where the future outcomes are
       uncertain
    B. None of the choices are correct
    C. EMV is the statistical concept that includes the average outcome
       of project outcomes based on various assumptions and scenario
    D. Decision tree analysis are tools of quantitative risk analysis
    E. Decision tree analysis uses EMV analysis

Answer: B

Question 572
In which of the following contract type will the buyer assume the
highest risk for cost overrun and non-performance?
   A. CPIF
   B. CPFF
   C. Fixed fee plus incentive contracts
   D. CPPC
   E. T&M contracts

Answer: D

Question 573
With respect to risk management, which of the following are not true
regarding decision tree analysis?
   A. Solving decision tree indicates which decision yields the greatest
      expected value to the decision maker
   B. Decision tree are tool of quantitative risk analysis process
   C. The PDM schedule is typically used to construct the decision tree
   D. Decision tree shows the impact of one decision over another

Answer: C

Question 574
You are currently in the process of prioritizing risks by their impact and
probability of occurance. Which of the following tool/technique is least
useful?
   A. Probability impact analysis
   B. Risk data quality assessment
   C. Risk urgency assessment
   D. Interviewing, brainstorming
   E. Risk categorization

Answer: D

Question 575
Quantitative risk analysis involves all of the following except:
  A. Identify feasible cost and schedule targets given project risks
  B. Ensure that risk management policies are being followed
  C. Assess probability of meeting project objectives
  D. Quantify the potential project outcomes and probabilities

Answer: B

Question 576
Which of the following statements are false regarding sensitivity
analysis?
  A. Sensitivity analysis is a tool used in quantitative risk analysis
  B. Sensitivity analysis is useful for determining the relative
      importance of variables that have a high degree of uncertainty to
      those that have low uncertainty
  C. A tornado diagram is a display of sensitivity analysis
  D. Sensitivity analysis helps determine which risks have the most
      potential impact on the project
  E. Sensitivity analysis examines how variations and uncertainty of
      individual project element impacts the project objective,
      assuming all other project element are varied concurrently
Answer: A

Question 577
Which of the following document include a code of account identifier, a
statement of work, and a list of schedule milestones for each WBS
component?
   A. Activity list
   B. WBS dictionary
   C. Scope baseline
   D. WBS templates
   E. Activity resource requirements

Answer: B

Question 578
Which of the following statements are true regarding various activity
scheduling tools?
     A. PDM is also known as activity on arrow network
     B. ADM allows for conditional branching and iteration of activities
     C. PDM approach uses boxes(nodes)to represent activities, and
         arrows represent the relationship and dependencies of work
         packages
     D. PDM allows for conditional branching and iteration of activities

Answer: C

Question 579
  All of the statements regarding Planning Packages are true EXPECT:
      A. As work becomes more clearly defined ,planning packages are
         usually converted into work packages
      B. Planning packages reflect a future segment of work within a
         control account that has not yet been decomposed into
         detailed work packages
      C. Planning packages are WSB components with know work
         content but within detailed schedule activities
      D. None of the choices are correct

Answer: D

Question 580
Product analysis is a / technique of which of the following prosses?
  A. Scope Control
  B. Scope Definition
  C. Scope Planning
  D. Create WBS
  E. Scope Verification

Answer: B

Question 581
Which of the following statements are true?
  A. Total slake is the amount of time one can delay the start of a
     particular task without affecting the start of a successor task.
  B. Free slake is the time one can delay the start of a particular
     task, without delaying the completion of the project.
  C. Total slake is the amount of time one can delay the start of a
     particular task, without delaying the completion of the project.
  D. Free slake is the amount of time one can delay the start of a
     particular task without affecting the start of a successor task.

Answer: C, D

Question 582
Your project team is already created the WBS, developed estimates for
the work packages, and sequenced the project activities using the
precedence diagramming method. Which action should be performed
NEXT?
   A. Finalize the project schedule
   B. Implement schedule change control system
   C. Apply schedule compression techniques
   D. Obtain acceptance of completed project scope
   E. Decompose the work packages into smaller components called
      schedule activities

Answer: C

Question 583
You are in the process of identifying and documenting the project roles
and responsibilities and create staffing management plan. All of the
following are environmental factors that should be considered during
this process EXCEPT:
    A. Interpersonal
    B. Logistical
    C. Organizational, technical
    D. Competencies
    E. Political
Answer: D

Question 584
You are the project manager at a utility company. Due to the recent
rise in the cost of petroleum, your organization is exploring cheaper,
alternative forms of energy. You have just completed the project
Scope Planning process and created the Scope management plan.
However, upon review, you have determined that the resulting project
scope management plan is ambiguous and poorly written. A poorly
written project scope management plan will directly impact all of
the following EXCEPT:
   A. Ability to develop cost approximations for resources required to
       complete project activities
   B. Ability to formalize acceptance of the project deliverables
   C. Ability to create a detailed project scope statement as the basis
       for future decisions.
   D. Ability to control changes to the project scope
   E. Ability to identify the necessary activities that needs to be
       performed to produce project deliverables

Answer: A

Question 585
All of the following scheduling techniques account for resource
limitations/ availability EXCEPT:
    A. Resource leveling
    B. Critical chain method
    C. Critical path method
    D. Apply calendars

Answer: C

Question 586
The outputs from risk identification are usually contained in the
document called a risk register. All of the following should be included
in the risk register upon completion of the risk identification process
EXCEPT:
    A. List of potential responses
    B. Rot causes of risks
    C. Update risk categories
    D. List of identified risks
    E. Risk audits

Answer: E
Question 587
You are using the three-point estimating technique to estimate the
duration of a schedule activity. Which of the following is the correct
formula for calculating variance assuming a beta distribution?
   A. [(optimistic-pessimistic)^2+(most likely-pessimistic)*(most
      likely-optimistic)]/18
   B. ((optimistic-pessimistic)/6)^2
   C. (pessimistic + optimistic + most likely )/3
   D. (pessimistic +4 *(most likely)+ optimistic)/6

Answer: B

Question 588
You are the project manger assigned to build the house. You have
determined the dependencies between activities on the project. One of
the activity dependencies is that the foundation of the house must be
created prior to the construction of the frame which of the following is
true?
   A. This is an example of mandatory dependency
   B. This is start-to-start relationship
   C. This is finish-to-finish relationship
   D. This is an example of preferential logic
   E. This is start-to-finish relationship

Answer: A

Question 589
You are in the process of identifying and documenting the logical
relationships among schedule activities. Which of the following are
NOT outputs to this process?
   A. Activity list updates
   B. Requested changes
   C. Milestones list
   D. Project schedule network diagram
   E. Activity attributes updates

Answer: C

Question 590
You have been recently assigned to provide an accurate project
schedule for a large construction company. You are evaluating the
network diagram for the construction project.
Your lead engineer has given you the following estimates for several
critical path activity: 30 days (optimistic), 80 days (pessimistic), and
40 days (most likely). Which of the following dates can you commit
with approximately a 95 percent confidence level, assuming a beta
distribution?
    A. The activity will take between 30 days and 80 days
    B. Not enough information is provided
    C. The activity will take between 20 days and 70 days
    D. The activity will take between 36 days and 53 days
    E. The activity will take between 28 days and 61 days

Answer: E

Question 591
All of following are types of strategies that one can use to deal with
negative risk/threats EXCEPT:
    A. Accept
    B. Exploit
    C. Avoid
    D. Mitigate
    E. Transfer

Answer: B

Question 592
You are in the process of identifying and documenting the project roles
and responsibilities and create staffing management plan. Which of the
following are outputs of this process EXCEPT:
    A. Project staff assignments
    B. Project organization charts
    C. Staffing management plan
    D. Roles and responsibilities

Answer: A

Question 593
You have been recently assigned to provide an accurate project
schedule for constructing a new 50-story casino in Las Vegas, Nevada.
You are evaluating the network diagram for the construction project,
and are in the process of identifying the critical path of the project.
Based on the following diagram, which path is the critical path?
  A.   A-B-G-H
  B.   A-E-F-D-H
  C.   A-E-F-H
  D.   A-E-F-C-D-H
  E.   A-C-D-H

Answer: B

Question 594
The procurement management plan describes how the procurement
processes will be managed. All of the following should be documented
in the procurement management plan EXCEPT:
    A. Types of contracts to use
    B. Integration with other project processes
    C. Authority of the project team
    D. Evaluation criteria

Answer: D

Question 595
Which of the following best describes the schedule development
process?
   A. Analyzing activity sequences and activity durations to develop
      project schedule
   B. Estimating the number of work periods that will be needed for
      each activity
   C. Identifying interactivity dependencies
  D. Identifying the specific activities that must be performed to meet
     project objectives

Answer: A

Question 596
All of the statements regarding rolling wave planning is TRUE EXCEPT:
A. None of the choices are correct
B. Intermediate estimates are provided for the middle term tasks
C. Broad estimates are provided for far term tasks
D. Detailed estimates are provided for near term tasks

Answer: A

Question 597
A project schedule can be presented in various formats. All of the
following are valid formats of the project schedule EXCEPT:
    A. Activity-on-node diagram
    B. Time-scaled scheduled network diagram
    C. Milestone charts
    D. Logic bar charts
    E. Ishikawa diagrams

Answer: E

Question 598
You are the project manager for a construction company. You are
currently estimating how long it will take to perform the electrical
wiring of the building. You estimate that there are about 5,000 meters
of wiring required. You also estimate that your project team can wire
20 meters/hour. Hence you estimate that wiring will take
approximately 250 hours. Which of the following estimating techniques
did you apply in your analysis?
   A. Analogous estimating
   B. To-down estimating
   C. Parametric estimating
   D. Three-point estimates
   E. Bottom-up estimating

Answer: C

Question 599
Which of the following statements are false regarding the probability
impact matrix?
   A. The probability impact matrix is constructed by assigning risk
      based on combining probability and impact scales
   B. The probability impact matrix is a tool/ technique of the
      quantitative risk analysis process
   C. The risk score is calculated by multiplying the risk's probability
      with the risk's impact and comparing the results with the
      predefined risk threshold
   D. The probability impact matrix is used to determine if the risks
      should be classified high, medium, or low risks

Answer: B

Question 600
You are in the process of estimating the type and quality of resources
needed to complete individual schedule activities. All of the following
are outputs of this process EXCEPT:
   A. Resource calendar updates, requested change
   B. Resource breakdown structure
   C. Project schedule
   D. Activity attributes update
   E. Activity resource requirements

Answer: C

Question 601
You are in the process of numerically analyzing the effects of identified
risks. Which of the following are not tool/ techniques you can use in
this process?
   A. Expert judgment
   B. Sensitivity analysis
   C. Probability-impact matrix
   D. Probability distributions
   E. Data gathering and representation techniques

Answer: C

Question 602
Which of the following represents a hierarchically organized depiction
of the resources to be used on the project?
   A. WBS
   B. BOM
   C. None of the choices are correct
   D. OBS
   E. RBS
Answer: E

Question 603
You are the project manager for a software company that develops
sports-based video games. You have been assigned to develop a new
3D interactive basket ball video game. You have just completed the
development of the project scope management plan. Which of the
following processes did you just complete?
    A. Develop preliminary project scope statement
    B. Cope definition
    C. Scope control
    D. Scope planning
    E. Scope verification

Answer: D

Question 604
Which of the following is LEAST likely to improve the accuracy of cost
estimates produced through parametric cost estimating techniques?
   A. When cost estimates for work packages, control accounts, and
      planning packages in the WBS are accurate and detailed.
   B. When model is scalable
   C. When parameters used in the model are quantifiable
   D. When historical information used to develop the model is
      accurate

Answer: A

Question 605
What is the total slack for the following project?




   A.   34
   B.   131
   C.   73
   D.   None of the choices are correct
   E.   107

Answer: B
Question 606
You are the project manager for a construction company. Your firm
has been contracted to complete the construction of a 10-story office
building. This project will use three point estimates to calculate the
estimates for activity duration. You have the following estimates for
task A (creating the foundation).
Assuming the triangular distribution what is the average duration
estimate based on the following three point estimates?
Pessimistic= 100 days
Optimistic= 40 days
Most likely=65 days
   A. 65
   B. 12.3
   C. 248.6
   D. 68.33
   E. 151.4

Answer: E

Question 607
Which of the following best describes why one would use a resource
histogram versus a responsibility assignment matrix?
   A. Unlike the responsibility assignment matrix, a resource
      histogram shows when people will do their jobs
   B. Unlike the responsibility assignment matrix, a resource
      histogram shows the reporting relationships of project team
      members
   C. Unlike the responsibility assignment matrix, a resource
      histogram is helpful in tracking project costs and can be aligned
      with the organization's accounting systems
   D. Unlike the responsibility assignment matrix, a resource
      histogram describes the inert-dependencies among project
      activities.

Answer: A

Question 608
Which of the following statements are true regarding the critical chain
method?
  A. In CCM, planned activities are scheduled to their latest possible
     planned and start and finish dates
  B. The CCM uses, aggregate problem buffers in the project plan
     instead of individual activity/ task buffer
   C. The critical chain describes longest path through a project
      schedule network after resource leveling
   D. CCM factors in resource availability limitations when constructing
      the project schedule
   E. The CCM focuses on managing the total float of network paths to
      ensure that project are delivered on schedule

Answer: E

Question 609
Which of the following statement regarding WBS are true?
  A. Work include in the WBS is considered outside the scope of the
     project
  B. For productivity reasons, the WBS should be organized in the
     hierarchy that models the organizational hierarchy
  C. The WBS is an output of scope definition process
  D. Each item in the WBS is generally assigned a unique identifier
     that can provide a means to track costs and resources
  E. The lowest level in a WBS is called a work activity

Answer: D

Question 610
You are a project manager at an utility company. Due to the recent
rise in the cost of petroleum, the market demand for cheaper,
alternate forms of energy have grown exponentially. Your company
has identified, a multi billion dollar market opportunity for alternate
forms of energy.
However your organization does not have enough resources and
expertise to exploit this market opportunity. Hence your organization
has decided to form joint ventures and risk sharing relationship with
various other utility companies to coordinate research and
development activities. Which of he following best describes the best
strategy you are using with this market opportunity?
   A. Enhance
   B. Share
   C. Avoidance
   D. Exploit
   E. Acceptance

Answer: B

Question 611
Which of the following are the outputs of the activity resource
estimating process?
   A. WBS
   B. Activity resource requirements
   C. Activity list
   D. Cost estimates
   E. Cost baseline

Answer: B

Question 612
You are a project manager at day-old donuts, a rapidly growing
franchise selling premium donuts at a discount. Currently your
company is planning for opening new stores throughout the United
States. You have been asked to open a store in Manhattan, New York.
Construction on new store is about to begin. This corporate head
quarter wants to be informed when construction is nearly complete, so
they can produce all the supplies and inventories just in time.
You have been given a project charter, progressively elaborate the
requirements, and have just completed the scope definition/create
WBS processes. However while you are in activity definition process,
you realize that certain deliverables are missing from create WBS
process. What is your next plan of action?
   A. Include the deliverable as a part of the activity definition process
   B. Consult the scope management plan to determine how to revise
      the project scope to include this deliverable
   C. Review the WBS to include the missing deliverables, and define
      the relevant appropriate activities
   D. Consult your supervisor as to whether to include the deliverables
      as a part of project

Answer: C

Question 613
The risk register describes all identified risks. Which of the following is
not including as a part of risk register?
   A. Probability of occurrence, impact on objectives
   B. Reporting formats, tracking
   C. Proposed responses, owners, current status
   D. Risk description, category, causes

Answer: B

Question 614
You are the project manager at information technology division of a
large financial services firm in the United States. Your company offers
a web based trading platform that provides options and futures trading
for U.S commodities market. Due to the rise in popularity in futures
and options trading, your company has grown rapidly. In fact, due to
the rapid growth, the company's infrastructure is unable to meet the
growing demands.
To keep up with demands, you have bee assigned the responsibilities
of upgrading the company's network and computing infrastructure.
You have already inspected the existing infrastructure defined the
detailed project scope statement for your project. You are in the
process of developing the WBS. All of he following are outputs of the
following process except:
    A. WBS
    B. WBS dictionary
    C. Scope baseline
    D. Updates to project management plan
    E. Requested changes
    F. Performance reports

Answer: F

Question 615
You are in the process of estimating the number of work periods that
will be needed to complete individual schedule activities. All of the
following are valuable inputs to this process except:
    A. Schedule model data
    B. Activity resource requirements, resource calendar
    C. Duration estimating database
    D. Historical information, historical reference data
    E. Risk register, activity cost estimates

Answer: A

Question 616
Which of the following is a planning tool describing how the project
team will define the project scope, develop the detailed project scope
statement define and develop the work break down structure, verify
project scope, and control the project scope?
   A. Project scope management plan
   B. Project management plan
   C. Preliminary project scope statement
   D. None of the choices are correct
   E. Detailed project scope statement
Answer: A

Question 617
Which of the following describes how the various risk management
processes will be implemented, monitored, and controlled throughout
the project and describes the criteria that are used to establish the risk
threshold?
   A. Workaround plans
   B. Residual risks
   C. Risk management plans
   D. Checklists
   E. Risk response plans

Answer: C

Question 618
All of the following statements regarding management reserves are
true EXCEPT:
    A. Management reserves are not part of the project cost baseline
       but are included in the budget for the project
    B. Any gap at the end of a project between the funds allocated and
       the cost baseline and cash flow mounts shows the amount of the
       management reserve that was not used.
    C. Management reserve describes the difference between the
       maximum funding and the end of the cost baseline
    D. Management reserves are allowance for unplanned, but
       potentially require to changes to the project scope and cost
    E. Management reserves are distributed as part of the budget and
       are part of earned value calculations

Answer: E

Question 619
Which of the following is the amount of time that a scheduled activity
may be delayed without delaying the early start of any immediately
following schedule activities?
    A. Free float
    B. Average float
    C. Critical float
    D. Total float
    E. None of the choices are correct

Answer: A
Question 620
Qualitative risk analysis requires accurate data as its input. Risk Data
Quality Assessment is a technique to evaluate the degree to which the
data regarding risks would be useful. What is the best course of action
if the Risk Data Quality Assessment for most of the identified risks are
low?
    A. Attempt to gather more accurate data
    B. Re-evaluate the risk data quality assessment
    C. Develop a probability-impact matrix to compensate for the low
       rankings
    D. No further actions are needed, since a low Risk Data Quality
       Assessment is ideal

Answer: A

Question 621
Which of the following are NOT part of the PMI professional code of
contact?
   A. Ensuring personal integrity of others
   B. Enhancing professional capabilities
   C. Responsibility for actions
   D. Professional conduct

Answer: A

Question 622
Thomas is a project manager at a biotech company. He is an excellent
project manager with a very successful track record managing large,
complex R&D projects. During his leisure time, Thomas competes in
amateur body-building contests.
Body-building is an extremely competitive sport. So Thomas takes
performance enhancing drugs, such as steroids, in order to maintain
his competitive edge. His company does not have any policies
prohibiting usage of such performance enhancing drugs. How does this
affect his PMI status?
   A. Since Thomas exhibits professional conduct on his project, he his
       still considered a successful project manager, irrespective of his
       outside activities
   B. Since his company does not have an explicit policy prohibiting
       steroid usage, his steroid usage should not e called into question
   C. Thomas is violating one of the responsibilities of the PMI code of
       conduct
  D. His status with PMI is not affected, as his activities outside of
     work is not of concern to the PMI. PMI code of conduct in not
     applicable to personal and private lifestyle choices

Answer: C

Question 623
You work at RFID-PM Inc, a publicly traded company that develops
RFID technology. Radio Frequency Identification RFID is a method of
remotely storing and retrieving data using devices called RFID tags/
transponders. An RFID tag is a small object, such as an adhesive
sticker, that can be attached to or incorporated into a product
Your friend, Nelson, has asked you for the financial information
regarding your company. So you decide to forward him the pro forma
financial statements for the upcoming quarterly report that you
obtained from your finance department. Have you provided insider
information regarding your company?
    A. Although you have not provided, insider information you have
       violated the confidentiality agreement with your company
    B. Although you have not provided, insider information you have
       violated the non-disclosure agreement with your company
    C. You have not provided insider information since you merely
       forwarded publicly available data
    D. You have not provided insider information and violated the
       professional code of conduct

Answer: D

Question 624
Which of the following are NOT described in the PMI's member
Standards of Conduct?
   A. Responsibilities of PMI membership
   B. Professional best practices
   C. None of the choices are correct
   D. Relationship with the public and global community
   E. Relationship with customers, client, and employers

Answer: B

Question 625
Which of the following are NOT parts of the PMI professional Code of
Conduct?
  A. Enhancing professional capabilities
  B. Professional conduct
  C. Satisfying stakeholder requirement
  D. Responsibility for actions

Answer: C

Question 626
Integrate change control includes the following activities EXCEPT:
   A. Reviewing and approving requested changes
   B. Monitoring implementation of approved changes as they occur
   C. Reviewing and approving recommended corrective and
      preventive actions
   D. Maintaining the integrity of the baselines by releasing approved
      changes
   E. Influencing the factors that affect change

Answer: B

Question 627
Which of the following statements regarding configuration
management systems is LEAST true?
  A. Configuration management systems establish a method to
     consistently identify and request changes to establish baselines
  B. Configuration management systems provides mechanism to
     communicate changes to all stakeholders
  C. Configuration management systems provides opportunities to
     improve project by considering impact of changes
  D. Configuration management systems provides mechanisms to
     estimate project costs and schedules

Answer: D

Question 628
Which of the following statements regarding networking is false?
  A. Networking is a tool/technique of manage project team process
  B. Networking is a technique of developing relationships with
     people who may be able to assist in the achievement of
     objectives
  C. Networking activities include proactive correspondence, luncheon
     meetings, informal conversations
  D. None of the choices are correct

Answer: A

Question 629
You are project manager responsible for constructing a new sports
arena for the upcoming Olympics. Construction begins on a project
over a year ago. The stakeholders of the project want a status report
on the performance of the project to date. You've obtained the
following measurements:
BAC=500, PV=500, AC=200, EV=300, CPI=1.5
You believe the type of variances that have occurred on the project to
date are typical expect these variances to continue throughout the
project. Based on the information above, what is the ETC for the
project?
   A. 200
   B. 250
   C. 133.33
   D. 333.33
   E. 400

Answer: C

Question 630
Which of the following is a configuration management activity that
provides the basis from which the configuration of products is defined
and verified, products and documents are labeled, and changes are
managed?
   A. Configuration identification
   B. Configuration definition
   C. Configuration verification and auditing
   D. None of the choices are correct
   E. Configuration status accounting

Answer: A

Question 631
Which of the following best describes the difference between risk
audits and risk reviews?
  A. Risk audits are more proactive responses to project risks, while
      risk reviews are more reactive responses to risks
  B. Risk reviews are performed on smaller projects, while risk audits
      are performed on larger projects
  C. Risk audits should be performed by an outside party, while risk
      reviews are performed by the project team.
  D. Risk reviews are also called risk audits

Answer: C
Question 632
Project cost control includes all of the following EXCEPT:
   A. Identifying various costing alternatives
   B. Monitoring cost performance to detect variances from cost
      baseline
   C. Ensuring requested changes are agreed upon
   D. Bringing expected cost overruns within acceptable limits
   E. Informing stakeholders of approved changes

Answer: A

Question 633
You are the project manager at a large investment bank. Your current
project involves developing a creative financing solution for a large
bio-tech company in order to facilitate the acquisition of another
company. Specifically, your project involves issuing convertible debt
securities in order to access a new pool of low-cost capital. This
transaction is the largest ever convertible transaction in the bio-tech
company.
Fortunately, your project is a head of schedule and below budget, with
a CPI of 1.5 and SPI of 1.2. Hence, you have some flexibility to accept
a new work without delaying your current project or exceeding the
project budget. Midway through your budget, one of the stakeholders
of your project issues a change request to the change control board to
add a new task to your project. Specifically, the new work involves
developing the risk control system to manage the client company's
pension plans.
Although you have flexibility to accommodate the work change, you
don not understand how the new work fits within the existing project
for your current charter. After evaluating the change request, you
determine that work is self-contained with no overlap between the
existing work and new work. Furthermore, different skill sets are
required to implement the change request. Which of the following is
the BEST plan of action in this scenario?
   A. Identify the project objectives and create the preliminary project
       scope statement
   B. Identify the specific changes that are required in order to
       implement the change requests
   C. Implement the corresponding corrective actions associated with
       the change requests
   D. Re-evaluate the impact of the change requests on the project
       budget and project schedule
   E. Re-plan the project based on the newly added request
Answer: A

Question 634
You are a project manager responsible for constructing a new sports
arena in preparation of the upcoming Olympics.
Construction began on the project a year ago. The stakeholder of the
project want a status report on the performance of the project to the
date.
Unfortunately, you are afraid of telling your stakeholders that your
project is coming in over the budget and the cost change is required
using the cost change control system. Which of the following tools
were used to calculate the cost variance projection?
   A. Performance measurement analysis
   B. Analogous estimating
   C. Performance reports
   D. Performance reviews
   E. Trend analysis

Answer: A

Question 635
You are the project manager at a large automaker in Japan. Your
project involves designing the next generation four wheel drive Sports
Utility vehicle for the Asian market. Your project team is attempting to
determine the right combination of suspension, tires and chassis that
will ensure the stability of SUV at high speeds.
Your team members are using statistical methods to identify which
factors will influence specific variables related to vehicle stability. This
method is best described as:
   A. Benefit cost analysis
   B. Design of experiments
   C. Cause effect analysis
   D. Flowcharting
   E. Benchmarking

Answer: B

Question 636
Which of the following statements are true regarding project team
management?
  A. None of the choices are true
  B. Activity sequencing involves identifying the specific schedule
     activities that need to be performed to produce project
     deliverables
  C. Activity definition involves identifying and documenting
     dependencies among schedule activities
  D. Schedule development involves estimating the number of work
     periods that will be needed to complete individual schedule
     activities
  E. Activity resource estimating involves estimating the type and
     quantities of resources required to perform each schedule
     activity

Answer: E

Question 637
Which of the following processes uses the approved project schedule
as an input?
   A. Activity duration estimating
   B. Schedule development
   C. Activity definition
   D. Schedule control
   E. Activity sequencing

Answer: D

Question 638
Which of the following statements are false regarding the cost change
control system?
   A. A cost change control system is integrated with integrated
      change control process
   B. A cost change control system is included as part of the cost
      management plan
   C. cost change control system defines the procedures by which the
      cost baseline can be changed
   D. A cost change control system integrates project scope, cost and
      schedule to help the project management team assess the
      project performance
   E. A cost change control system includes forms, documentation,
      and approval level required to for authorizing changes

Answer: D

Question 639
You are the project manger at a leading manufacturer of consumer
electronics, personal computers and peripherals. Unfortunately, your
company is facing a rapidly maturing market characterized by
consolidation and commoditization. Hence you have been assigned a
project to drive growth and profit by integrating an online CRM
(costumer relationship management) solution. Industry benchmarks
suggest the CRM solution should generate $100-$300M in bottom the
benefits.
You've determined the following information so far: Activity X has an
early start of day3, early finish of day6, and a late finish of day10.
Activity Y is being performed by resource that had been very difficult
to obtain. The CPI of the project is 0.8 and the SPI is 1.2. Based on
the information above, which of the following areas should cause the
MOST concern?
    A. Schedule
    B. Cost
    C. Quality
    D. Float
    E. Resource

Answer: B

Question 640
Which of the following best describes what is a workaround?
  A. Workarounds are ways to mitigate risk using avoidance, transfer,
     or risk mitigation
  B. Workarounds are equivalent to corrective actions
  C. Workarounds are unplanned responses to risks that were
     previously unidentified or accepted
  D. Workarounds are result of implementing a risk response
  E. Workarounds are used for monitoring overall project
     performance against a baseline plan

Answer: C

Question 641
Which of the following best describes risks that arise as a direct
implementation of implementing a risk response?
  A. Contingency risks
  B. Secondary risks
  C. Tertiary risks
  D. Residual risks

Answer: B

Question 642
The monitor and control project work process is performed to monitor
project processes and performance. Which of the following are you
LEAST concerned with during this process?
   A. Analyzing and tracking project risks
   B. Reviewing and approving requested changes
   C. Providing forecast to update current costs
   D. Providing information to support status reporting
   E. Assessing performance to determine whether corrective actions
      are necessary

Answer: B

Question 643
You are presented the following schedule data regarding various
project activities on the critical path:




You are told that the project has a negative float of 4 months. Which
activity or activities would you crash to save four months on the
project?
   A. T, U, V
   B. T, V
   C. S, V
   D. S,T, U
   E. X

Answer: A

Question 644
You are the project manager at a manufacturer of electronic
components. Your company had been a long time market leader in
electronic components distribution industry. However, in recent years,
the Internet has transformed the competitive landscape. As a result
company's market share has been eroding.
Hence, your current project involves implementing the company's
internet strategies to best exploit these altered dynamics and increase
the company's market share. You are in the project planning process,
and are personally estimating the time needed for each activity. Once
you've created the overall project estimate. You commit to completing
the project deliverables to this date. Which of the following BEST
explains why this is the INCORRECT way to estimate the schedule?
   A. The estimates should have come form the project team
      members
   B. The estimate should have accounted for the market dynamics
      and timing requirements
   C. The project sponsor should have been actively involved in
      producing the estimates
   D. The estimates should have been created by management

Answer: A

Question 645
All of the following statements are true regarding scatter diagrams?
    A. Scatter diagrams use statistical measurement to identify the
       most important problems through different measurement scales,
       i.e. frequency, cost, etc, and directs attention and efforts to the
       most significant problems and/ or opportunities
    B. Scatter diagrams illustrate the relationship between two
       variables
    C. Scatter diagrams illustrates a chart with upper and lower control
       limits on which values of some statistical measure for a series of
       samples are plotted
    D. Scatter diagrams display the duration of a set of activities in a
       project's cycle

Answer: B

Question 646
All of the following are examples of quality metrics EXCEPT:
    A. Test coverage
    B. Checklists
    C. Defect density
    D. Reliability
    E. Failure rate

Answer: B

Question 647
All of the following can be used to reduce the amount of conflict in a
project team?
    A. Role definition
    B. Group norms
   C. Recognition and rewards
   D. Communication planning
   E. Team ground roles

Answer: C

Question 648
All of the following are part of cost baseline EXCEPT:
    A. WBS dictionary
    B. Project scope management plan
    C. WBS
    D. Project scope statement

Answer: B

Question 649
Which of the following statements are false?
  A. The evaluation of a team's effectiveness can include indicators
     such as reduce staff turnover rate
  B. The management project team process involves tracking project
     team member performance, providing feedback, and
     coordinating changes to improve project performance.
  C. As a result of managing the project team, the staffing
     management plan is updated, changes requests are submitted,
     and issues are resolved
  D. Management of the project team is simplified when team
     members are accountable to both a functional manager and a
     project manager within a matrix organization

Answer: D

Question 650
You are a project manager at a real estate company that develops and
manages commercial, retail and residential properties in United States
and Europe. As a company continues to grow, the company's IT
infrastructure is unable to meet business needs of organization.
Specifically, you have been assigned to upgrade the company's IT
infrastructure. Specifically, your team has been asked to implement a
corporate general ledger system, improve accounting and real estate
processes, develop and implement lease tracking system, and
implement HR and payroll systems and perform diagnostics and
monthly closures.
Your project team has already completed all the initiating / project
planning activities and received sign-off approvals on the project
charter, project scope, and detailed work packages. Your project team
is in the process of completing all the work packages.
However, you would like to make a minor change to the project
management plan. You have already investigated the options on how
to implement the change and determined that the change has no
effect on the components of the "triple constraints". Which of the
following should you perform NEXT?
    A. Investigate other options on how to implement the change
       requests with minimal impact to the project
    B. Ask project sponsor for approval
    C. Implement the change to the project management plan
    D. Ask the change control board for approval
    E. Evaluate the impact of change request on other project
       constraints

Answer: C

Question 651
All of the following statements are true regarding the critical path
EXCEPT:
    A. A project can have negative float
    B. A critical path can run over a dummy activity
    C. Changes to the end date of a project will require a change to the
       project network diagram
    D. A project can have multiple critical paths

Answer: C

Question 652
Which of the following is NOT and output of manage stake holders
process?
   A. Resolved issues
   B. Approved corrective actions
   C. Issue logs
   D. Approved change requests
   E. Project management plan updates

Answer: C

Question 653
You are currently analyzing the schedule for a project. You've noticed
that for a certain activities in the project, large schedule variances
exist. Which of the following activities are true?
   A. Such schedule variances will impact the schedule
  B.   Such schedule variances may sometimes impact the schedule
  C.   Not enough information is provided
  D.   Such schedule variances will not impact the schedule
  E.   Such scope variances are a result of scope changes

Answer: B

Question 654
You are the project manager for the international contract
manufacturing firm with manufacturing the plants and offices in India,
China and Thailand. Your company design and manufacture various
consumer electronics such as flat screen, television, laptop computers,
monitors, e.t.c.
Your company is currently under contract to manufacture the next
generation 128-bit video game console for x-cube station. Work has
begun on the project, and you are in the process of confirming the
initial work results with stakeholders. You are in the process of
working with the stakeholders to confirm acceptance of the initial work
results. Which process are you performing?
      A. Control administration
      B. Perform quality assurance
      C. Scope verification
      D. Perform quality control
      E. Performance reporting

Answer: C

Question 655
You are the project manager in the I.T. department of a major
hospital. Your current project involves developing a web-based
interface for legacy mainframe patient-tracking application. Your
current project has recently experienced a change where many of the
agreed-upon WBS elements were modified as a result. Which type of
change has occurred within your project?
   A. Project change
   B. Quality change
   C. Scope change
   D. Schedule change
   E. WBS update

Answer: C

Question 656
Your company is making a strategy shift: form being focused on
fulfilling customer requests for becoming the best cost dairy producer
in industry. Its existing cost manufacturing cost system, however fails
to capture the costs associated with handling special flavors, small
production orders, and complex delivery and order processing options.
Hence you've been assigned to supervise an existing project to
develop a new time-drive, activity-based costing system that will
capture the full complexity of the company's operations and gives
managers new insights into the profitability orders, products, and
customers. Senior management will use the information to enhance
process efficiencies, negotiating new terms with customers, and
attempt to win new business.
Unfortunately, you have very limited knowledge of this technical area.
Fortunately, some of your project team members are highly technical,
and hence you've decided to delegate most of the project
management activities to them. Specifically, you have delegated
schedule development, cost estimating, an assignment of project
activities to your technical team members, while you serve as an
occasional coordinator of project activities. Which of the following will
be the MOST likely result of this arrangement?
    A. Your project team will initially exhibit a high level of productivity,
        but performance and effectiveness will decrease as the project
        progresses
    B. Your project team will exhibit low productivity levels, poor
        morale, and high levels of conflict throughout the project
    C. Your project team will exhibit a high level of creativity,
        commitment, and productivity throughout the entire project
    D. Your project team will exhibit low productivity levels throughout
        but will exhibit a strong team spirit and morale due to the shared
        nature of responsibilities
    E. Your project team will initially exhibit a low level of productivity,
        but after an adjustment period, will exhibit high levels of
        effectiveness and cohesiveness

Answer: B

Question 657
You are in the process of controlling changes to the project scope. All
of the following are tools/techniques you can use EXCEPT:
   A. Variance analysis
   B. Replanning
   C. Configuration management system
   D. Product analysis
   E. Change control system
Answer: D

Question 658
The Estimate At Completion (EAC) can be used to forecast the most
likely total project cost based upon the current project performance.
Which of the following formulas cannot be used to calculate the EAC
when past estimating assumptions are incorrect or past assumptions
are no longer relevant?
    A. EAC=AC + ETC
    B. EAC= AC+BAC+PV
    C. EAC= AC+BAC-EV
    D. EAC=(AC+(BAC-EV)/CPI)
    E. EAC=(AC+(VAC-EV)/CPI)

Answer: A

Question 659
Quality audits are a tool/technique of which of the following processes?
  A. Scope verification
  B. Perform quality assurance
  C. Perform quality control
  D. Quality planning
  E. Manage stakeholders

Answer: B

Question 660
The risk monitoring and control process involves all of the following
EXCEPT:
  A. Choosing alternate strategies
  B. Modifying the project management plan
  C. Analyzing quality of the risk data
  D. Executing a contingency plan
  E. Taking corrective actions

Answer: C

Question 661
Keeping up with the growth was becoming a problem for a privately
owned Chinese financial services company. Although it easily lured
business from state-owned competitors, low skill levels and weak
accounting systems threaten the company's cash flow. Moreover,
poorly invested assets were delivering inadequate returns.
Hence, you have been assigned over an existing project to upgrade
the IT system to allow for an expansion. Specifically, the IT upgrade
will enable the company to serve more competitors, expand the
product line, gain market share, and win more licenses.
You've determined the following information so far: Activity X has an
early start of day3, early finish of day6, and a late finish of day10.
Activity Y is being performed by resource that had been very difficult
to obtain. The CPI of the project is 1.2 and the SPI is 1.3.
Midway through your project, your client has requested additional
deliverables to your project. Fortunately, you have already determined
that this functionality will only add one extra week to the critical path.
To accommodate this request, you've determined that you could fast-
track the schedule to recover one extra week. Which of the following
should you perform NEXT?
   A. Evaluate the impact of the change request on the other project
       constraints
   B. Inform the client the impact of the change
   C. Consult the project sponsor before taking action
   D. Implement the change request
   E. Investigate other options on how to implement the change
       requests with minimal impact to the project

Answer: C

Question 662
You are the project manager at a manufacturer of electronic
components. Your company had been a long time market leader in
electronic components distribution industry. However, in recent years,
the Internet has transformed the competitive landscape. As a result
company's market share has been eroding.
Hence, your current project involves implementing the company's
internet strategies to best exploit these altered dynamics and increase
the company's market share. Unfortunately, your project is plagued by
frequent changes to the project charter. Who should be the primary
person responsible for deciding whether the changes to the project
charter are necessary?
   A. Stakeholders
   B. Project team
   C. Project sponsor
   D. Change control board
   E. Project manager

Answer: C
Question 663
You are in the process of controlling changes to the project schedule.
All of the following are tool/ techniques of this process EXCEPT:
    A. Variance analysis
    B. Schedule change control system
    C. Progress reporting
    D. Performance measurement
    E. Resource leveling

Answer: E

Question 664
Which of the following statements are true regarding the SPI (schedule
performance index) measurement?
   A. A SPI greater than one indicates that schedule performance is
      better than expected
   B. A negative SPI indicates that schedule performance is better
      than expected
   C. A SPI less than one indicates that schedule performance is better
      than expected
   D. A positive SPI indicates that schedule performance is better than
      expected

Answer: A

Question 665
All of the following statements are true regarding a change control
system EXCEPT:
    A. A change request system has the authority to approve or reject
       change requests
    B. A change request system defines the level of authority needed to
       approve changes
    C. A change control system is a collection of procedures that
       describe how to submit change request
    D. A change control system tracks the status of change requests
    E. A change control system is an output of the integrated change
       control process

Answer: A, E

Question 666
You are in the process of monitoring the various project processes and
their performance. Which of the following is the LEAST appropriate
tool/ technique to use in this process?
   A.   Expert judgment
   B.   Earned value technique
   C.   Project management methodology
   D.   Variance analysis
   E.   Project management information system

Answer: D

Question 667
Which of the following best describes a conflict resolution technique
the temporarily solves a problem by downplaying the problem to make
the problem appear less important/ critical?
   A. Compromise
   B. Confrontation
   C. Smoothing
   D. Withdrawal
   E. Forcing

Answer: C

Question 668
You are in the process of controlling changes to the project scope. All
of the following are outputs of this process EXCEPT:
   A. Recommended corrective actions
   B. Work performance information
   C. Project management plan updates
   D. Scope baseline updates
   E. Requested changes

Answer: B

Question 669
You are in the process of controlling changes to the project cost
baseline. Which of the following is the LEAST helpful tool / technique?
   A. Performance measurement analysis
   B. Forecasting, variance management
   C. Reserve analysis
   D. Project performance reviews
   E. Cost change control system

Answer: C

Question 670
With respect to the earned value analysis, which of the following will
tell you whether costs are higher or lower than budgeted?
    A. Cost variance
    B. Schedule variance
    C. Actual costs
    D. Earned value
    E. Planned costs

Answer: A

Question 671
Which of the following techniques may be used on a project to resolve
conflicts?
   A. Controlling, forcing, compromise, withdrawal
   B. Directing, forcing, compromise, confrontation
   C. Controlling, directing, compromise, confrontation, smoothing
   D. Forcing, smoothing, compromise, confrontation, withdrawal

Answer: D

Question 672
Which of the following statements are true regarding quality planning
and perform quality assurance?
  A. The quality planning process uses the tool such as benefit costs
     analysis, benchmarking, flow charting, and design of experiment
     and cost of quality. Quality assurance involves identifying which
     quality standards are relevant to the project.
  B. Quality planning is the totality of characteristic of an entity that
     bear on its ability to satisfy stated or implied needs. Quality
     assurance involves evaluating overall project performance to
     ensure that the project will satisfy quality standards.
  C. Quality assurance is the totality of characteristic of an entity that
     bear on its ability to satisfy stated or implied needs. Quality
     assurance involves evaluating overall project performance to
     ensure that the project will satisfy quality standards
  D. Quality planning involves evaluating overall project performance
     to ensure that the project will satisfy quality standards. Quality
     assurance involves identifying which quality standards are
     relevant to the project.

Answer: A

Question 673
Consider the project integration management knowledge area. Which
of the following process are NOT included?
   A. Integrated change control
   B. Develop preliminary project scope statement
   C. Develop project management plan
   D. None of the choices are true
   E. Direct and manage execution

Answer: A

Question 674
Which of the following best describes the expectancy theory of
motivation?
  A. People are motivated by expectation of positive outcomes
  B. People are motivated by five basic, hierarchical needs
  C. People are motivated by hygiene factors
  D. People are motivated by achievement, power, and affiliation

Answer: A

Question 675
Which of the following process involves making needed information
available to project stakeholders in a timely manner?
   A. Performance reporting
   B. Communications planning
   C. Information distribution
   D. Manage stakeholders

Answer: C

Question 676
You have been recently hired to be a project manager at a bio-tech
company to develop anew drug for the treatment for diabetes. George
is your chief scientist. Over the past few years, George has helped the
company develop various patents and technologies with regard to
treating diabetes. To say the least, George is critical to company's
success.
Lately, George has been demanding a 50% increase in his salary. He is
threatening to leave the company if he does not receive a salary
increase. Which type of power is George yielding in order to get his
pay increase?
    A. Expert power
    B. Referent power
    C. Legitimate power
   D. Coercive power
   E. Punishment power

Answer: A

Question 677
All of the following knowledge area process do NOT have processes in
the Executing process group EXCEPT:
    A. Project Cost Management
    B. Project Time Management
    C. Project Risk Management
    D. Project Scope Management
    E. Project Procurement Management

Answer: E

Question 678
You are a project manager for the manufacture of children's toys. Your
project team is in the process of designing a new children toy for New
Year Christmas season.
With the rapidly approaching deadline, your team members are
frequently arguing with each other, even if they agree on some real
issues. Within, your team there is a strong resistance to quality
approaches and resistance to new tasks. Which of the following stages
of develop project team best describes your team?
   A. Storming
   B. Norming
   C. Forming
   D. None of the choices are correct
   E. Performing

Answer: A

Question 679
Which of the following statements are FALSE regarding Herzberg's
Hygiene Theory?
  A. None of the choices are correct
  B. Motivation factors include achievement, job advancement, and
     recognition
  C. Motivation factors help avoid job dissatisfaction but will NOT lead
     to job satisfaction
  D. Hygiene factors help avoid job dissatisfaction but will not lead to
     job satisfaction
  E. Hygiene factors include pay, salary and benefits
Answer: C

Question 680
You are a project manager at a biotech company, where you are
leading a cross functional team to develop a treatment for diabetes.
The organization has a weak matrix structure, where al of your team
members report to different functional managers and none of the team
member report to you directly. Your project has extremely high
visibility in the company, and there is a lot of pressure on you to
deliver on time and within budget. However, you are concerned
whether you will have the necessary authority and power to complete
the project deliverables. Which of the following types of powers will be
MOST effective in your situation?
   A. Reward power
   B. Referent power
   C. Punishment power
   D. Legitimate power

Answer: A

Question 681
Which of the following statements are false regarding RACI charts?
  A. A RACI chart is type of RAM.
  B. RACI stands for Responsibility, Accountable, Consult and Isolate.
  C. RACI charts allow person to see all activities associated with one
     person or to see all people associated with one activity
  D. RACI charts are tools/ techniques of Human Resource Planning

Answer: B

Question 682
Which of the following tool / technique are of develop project team
process EXCEPT:
   A. Negotiation
   B. Recognition and rewards
   C. Co-location
   D. Training
   E. General management skills

Answer: A

Question 683
You are the project manager of a company that is building ATM
software for a large bank and financial institutions. You have been told
that the ATM software must meet very stringent quality standards.
Including rigorous auditing of all transactions, ability to recover in case
of software/ hardware errors, and fraud detection/analysis and robust
two-factor authentication.
The ATM system has been shipped to several large banks and
customers. However, one of your customers is complaining that your
ATM system does not adequately perform two-factor authentication. In
fact, there is a potential vulnerability in the software that would allow
a sophisticated attacker to withdraw money from other people's
account.
In light of these issues, your company has decided to recall all the ATM
systems, and perform a hardware/ software upgrade. Which of the
following best describes these costs associated with your project?
    A. Appraisal costs
    B. Prevention costs
    C. Defect costs
    D. Failure costs
    E. Rework costs

Answer: D

Question 684
Which of the following BEST describes a mutually binding legal
agreement that obligates the seller to provide specified products /
services and obligates the buyer to pay the seller?
   A. None of the choices are correct
   B. Contract
   C. NDA agreements
   D. Contract management plan
   E. Procurement document package

Answer: B

Question 685
Which of the following statements are true regarding proposals
EXCEPT:
  A. None of the choices are correct
  B. Proposals are seller-prepared documents that describe the
     seller's ability to provide requested changes
  C. Proposals are not considered legally binding
  D. Proposals are outputs of the request seller responses process
Answer: C

Question 686
All of the following statements are true regarding the request seller
responses process EXCEPT:
    A. The tool/technique of this process are weighting systems,
       independent estimates, and screening systems
    B. The prospective sellers, normally at no direct cost to the project,
       expend most of the actual effort in this process
    C. The output of this process include proposals and qualified sellers
       list
    D. The process involves obtaining responses from prospective
       sellers on how project requirements can be satisfied
    E. The process is a part of the project executing process group

Answer: A

Question 687
Which of the following tools/ technique of the quality planning process
can be used to identify the project variables that will have the greatest
impact on overall project outcomes and results?
   A. Flowcharting
   B. Design of experiments
   C. Benefit/ cost analysis
   D. Benchmarking

Answer: B

Question 688
You are the project manager for a company that sells online music.
The company is growing so well that the company has outgrown its I.T
infrastructure. In fact, the company's current infrastructure is unable
to handle the terabytes of music download each day.
As a result, the company has decided to outsource its music download
infrastructure to a third party content management vendor. The
content management vendor will host the compressed music files
across its geographically distributed web server farms, and handle all
the logistics with music file downloads and data streaming.
On your qualified sellers list, you have identified one potential vendor
MusikCM. Your procurement department is conducting an independent
estimate of costs of the proposals in order to compare the vendor
prices. However, your procurement department has identified a large
difference between the independent estimate and the proposed vendor
cost. Which of the following statements are FALSE?
  A. The SOW did not contain the enough detail
  B. The vendor failed to respond to all the requirements specified in
     the contract
  C. The terms of the contract did not contain enough details
  D. You are currently in the request seller responses process
  E. The vendor failed to respond to all items in the SOW

Answer: D

Question 689
Which of the following statements are FALSE?
  A. Approved change requests are input to the Direct and Manage
     Execution process and consists of documented, authorized
     directions that reduce the probability of negative consequences
     associated with project risks
  B. Approved defect repair are input to the Direct and Manage
     Execution process and consists of documented, authorized
     requests for product correction of a defect found during quality
     inspection
  C. Approved corrective actions are input to the Direct and Manage
     Execution process and consists of documented, authorized
     directions required to bring expected future project performance
     into conformance with project plan
  D. None of the statements are false
  E. Validated defect repair are input to the Direct and Manage
     Execution process and consists of notification that re-inspected
     repaired items have been either rejected or accepted

Answer: A

Question 690
You are in the process of making information available to project
stakeholders in a timely manner. All of the following statements are
true EXCEPT:
   A. You need the communications management plan as one off the
      process inputs
   B. Communication skills, information distribution methods, and
      lessons learned processes are tools/ techniques you can use
   C. Performance reports are one of the process outputs
   D. You are in the project executing process group

Answer: C

Question 691
The project management executing processes include all of the
following EXCEPT:
    A. Information distribution, request seller responses
    B. Select seller, acquire project team
    C. Perform quality assurance, develop project team
    D. Request seller responses, risk identification

Answer: D

Question 692
Which of the following process is involved with collecting and
disseminating performance information?
   A. Information distribution
   B. Communications planning
   C. Manage stakeholders
   D. Performance reporting

Answer: D

Question 693
You are in the process of directing the performance of the planned
project activities and managing the various technical and
organizational interfaces that exist within your project. Which of the
following process are you performing?
     A. Monitor and control project work
     B. Integrate change control
     C. Develop project management plan
     D. Human resource planning
     E. Direct and manage project execution

Answer: E

Question 694
You are the project manager at a financial services company. Your
company has awarded a CPFF (cost plus fixed fee) contract to XYZ
Corp, a financial consulting company, to develop a comprehensive
workstation offering real-time advanced charting, decision support
tools, and portfolio management.
The terms and conditions of the contract explicitly stipulate that XY
Corp must provide weekly status reports and performance reports
regarding the project work. However, the seller has failed to provide
any status report for the past 3 weeks.
Which of the following is the BEST action to take?
   A. Half payments until the missing status reports are prepared
  B. Issue a change order
  C. Issue a letter of default
  D. Issue a stop work order to XYZ Corp, until the missing status
     reports are prepared
  E. Alert the management team

Answer: C

Question 695
Which of the following statements are FALSE regarding weighting and
screening systems?
   A. Weighting systems and screening systems are tool/ techniques
      of request seller responses process
   B. None of the choices are correct
   C. Weighting systems are methods for quantifying quantitative data
      to minimize any biases when performing seller selection
   D. Screening systems establish minimum requirements for
      performance for one or more evaluation criteria when selecting a
      prospective seller

Answer: A

Question 696
Which of the following statements are FALSE regarding Bidder
conferences?
   A. Bidder conferences involves the receipt of bids or proposals and
      the application of the evaluation criteria in order to select a
      vendor
   B. Bidder conferences allows prospective vendors to ask questions
      and clarify issues with regards to project and the RFP
   C. Bidder conferences are meetings with prospective sellers prior to
      the preparation of a proposal
   D. All potential sellers must remain on equal standing during this
      process
   E. Bidder conferences are tools/ techniques of the request seller
      response process

Answer: A

Question 697
Which of the following statements are true regarding proposals
EXCEPT:
  A. Proposals are seller-prepared documents that describes the
     seller ability to provide requested services
  B. Proposals are considered a formal and legal response/ offer to a
     buyer's request
  C. Proposals are output of the Request Seller Response process
  D. Proposals can combine the technical (approach) and commercial
     (price) sections, which must be evaluated together.

Answer: D

Question 698
Reasons for changing the staffing management plan include all of the
following EXCEPT:
    A. None of the choices are correct
    B. Illness
    C. Promotions
    D. Changing workloads
    E. Retirements

Answer: A

Question 699
Which of the following are outputs of the information distribution
process EXCEPT:
   A. Information received from stakeholders
   B. Documentation of reasoning behind corrective changes
   C. Correspondence, memos, and documents describing the project
   D. Performance reports
   E. Formal and informal project status report

Answer: D

Question 700
Which of the following describes an input to the direct and manage
project execution process that consists of documented, authorized
directions required to bring expected future project performance into
conformance with project plan?
   A. Approved change requests
   B. Implemented preventive actions
   C. Implemented change requests
   D. Approved preventive actions
   E. Implemented corrective actions
   F. Approved corrective actions

Answer: F
Question 701
Which of the following are outputs of the develop project team
process?
   A. Team performance assessment
   B. Performance reports
   C. Reward and recognition systems
   D. Project staff assignment
   E. Input to performance appraisals

Answer: A

Question 702
You are in the process of directing the performance of the planned
project activities and managing the various technical and
organizational interfaces that exist within your project. All of the
following are outputs of this process EXCEPT:
    A. Deliverables
    B. Implemented WBS updates
    C. Implemented defect repair, work performance information
    D. Implemented corrective actions, implemented preventive actions
    E. Requested changes, implemented change request

Answer: B

Question 703
Which of the following are false regarding corrective actions?
  A. Corrective actions generally do not require root cause analysis ti
     identify the cause of variation
  B. Corrective actions are the outputs of process in the controlling
     process group
  C. Corrective actions are used to bring expected future project
     performance in line with the project plan
  D. Approved corrective are inputs to the direct and manage project
     execution process

Answer: A

Question 704
You are a project manager at a project company developing wireless
mobile applications. You are currently in the risk identification process,
where you are trying to identify and document all risk that might
impact the project.
You have assembled your experts both from inside and outside the
company. You have asked them to make a anonymous questionnaire
to identify the potential risks of the project. The experts will then mail
back the questionnaire directly to you. Once you have received the
feedback, you intend to organize the responses in order to compile a
final list of potential project risks. Which of the following best describes
the techniques are you using?
    A. Normal group technique
    B. Assumption analysis
    C. Delphi technique
    D. Brainstorming
    E. Diagramming technique

Answer: C

Question 705
Which of the following depicts a hierarchical tabulation of physical
assemblies, subassemblies and components required to manufacture a
product?
   A. BOM
   B. RBS
   C. OBS
   D. WBS
   E. None of the choices are correct

Answer: A

Question 706
You are in the process of defining the specific activities that need to be
performed to develop the necessary project deliverables. Which of the
following are NOT outputs that you will produce during this process?
    A. Activity list
    B. Milestone list
    C. Project schedule network diagram
    D. Requested changes
    E. Activity attributes

Answer: C

Question 707
You are in the process of establishing a total cost baseline for
measuring project performance. Which of the following is the LEAST
helpful INPUT?
   A. WBS, WBS dictionary
   B. Project funding requirements, performance reports
   C. Activity cost estimates & supporting details
  D. Contract, resource calendars, cost management plan
  E. Project scope statement, project schedule

Answer: B

Question 708
Which f the following processes involves determining and documenting
which risks are likely to affect the project?
  A. Risk response planning
  B. Risk management planning
  C. Risk identification
  D. Risk monitoring and control

Answer: C

Question 709
You are currently the project manager at a rapidly growing retailer of
high-performance audio equipment. You have been asked to lead the
project to expand the retail business in the Unite States. You are
currently deciding amongst three promising geographic locations: New
York, Seattle, and San Francisco.
You have been asked that San Francisco has a smaller market
potential, but the probabilities of success is high. On the other hand,
the New York market has larger market potential, but the probability
of success is low. Your project team member has given you the
following forecast. Which of the following statements are true?




  A. You should select Seattle, as it provides the highest expected
     monetary value
  B. You should select San Francisco, as it provides the highest
     expected monetary value
  C. You should select New York, as it provides the highest expected
     monetary value
  D. You should use multi-objective programming algorithms to
     determine which location to select
   E. You should select San Francisco, as it provides the lowest NPY
      value

Answer: A

Question 710
Schedule model data, which is an output of the schedule development
process, includes all of the following EXCEPT:
   A. Schedule milestones, schedule activities
   B. Resource histogram
   C. Schedule baseline
   D. Alternative schedules
   E. Activity attributes, constraints and assumptions

Answer: C

Question 711
Which of the following statements are FALSE regarding sensitivity
analysis?
   A. Sensitivity analysis helps determine which risks have the most
       potential impact on the project
   B. Sensitivity analysis is a statistical concept that calculates the
       average outcome of project objectives under different
       assumptions and scenarios
   C. A tornado diagram is a display of sensitivity analysis
   D. Sensitivity analysis examines how variation and uncertainty of
       individual project element impacts of project objective,
       assuming all other project elements re varied concurrently

Answer: B

Question 712
Which of the following statements are FALSE regarding project scope
management plan?
  A. Project scope management plan specifies how changes to the
     project scope statement will be managed.
  B. Project scope management plan specifies how WBS will be
     created, maintained and approved
  C. The project scope management plan describes how the project
     scope will be defined and managed by the project scope
     management team
  D. The project scope management plan is an output of the Scope
     Definition process
  E. The project scope management plan is contained within the
     project management plan

Answer: D

Question 713
All of the following precedence relationships can be expressed using
PDM EXCEPT:
    A. None of the choices are correct
    B. Start-to-finish
    C. Finish-to-start
    D. Finish-to-finish
    E. Start-to-start

Answer: A

Question 714
You are in the process project a project schedule for repainted your
house, you first need to scrap off the existing paint, and then add a
layer of primer. The primer provides the paint a better bonding surface
so it sticks to the base material much better. Without priming, drywall
surfaces will soak up more finish paint in some areas than in others,
producing a splotchy effect.
Unfortunately, you have to wait once the primer is applied you must
wait until the primer dries before adding on the actual paint. You
estimate that it will take 8 hours for the primary to dry. To correctly
sequence these activities, which of the following should you do?
   A. Add a lag time 8 hours to the priming task
   B. Add a lead time of 8 hours to the priming task
   C. Add float time between the priming and painting tasks
   D. Fast track the priming and painting tasks

Answer: A

Question 715
Which of the following describes the difference between the maximum
funding and the end of cost baseline?
   A. Funding requirements
   B. Expected cash flow
   C. Estimate to completion
   D. Management reserve
   E. Funding limit reconciliation

Answer: D
Question 716
A poorly written detailed Project Scope Statement will impact all of the
following EXCEPT:
    A. Ability to create a work breakdown structure
    B. Ability to develop a project charter
    C. Ability to define schedule activities
    D. Ability to define cost estimates
    E. Ability to define risk management activities


Answer: B

Question 717
All of the following are he benefits of using WBS except:
    A. Shows dependencies between project tasks
    B. Obtain team buy in
    C. Facilities communication between project team members and
       stakeholders
    D. Provides a basis for estimating cost and time
    E. Identifies all the required work for project

Answer: A

Question 718
You are a project manager at an utility company. Due to the recent
rise in the cost of petroleum, the market demand for cheaper alternate
forms of energy has grown exponentially. Your company has identified
a multi billion dollar market opportunity for alternate forms of energy.
However your organization does not have enough resources and
expertise to exploit this market opportunity. Hence your organization
has identified and hire a team of scientists. Your organization is
working with recruiting firm to identify the qualified candidates. Which
of the following best describes the type of strategy you are using to
deal with this market opportunity?
   A. Avoidance
   B. Acceptance
   C. Exploit
   D. Share
   E. Enhance

Answer: C

Question 719
You would like to develop a cost estimates for your project. However
you are under tremendous time pressure, and do not have a time to
perform extensive cost calculations. You just need to determine a
quick, ball park estimates for your project. Which of the following cost
estimating techniques should you use?
   A. Cost based estimating
   B. PDM
   C. Bottom up estimating
   D. ADM
   E. Analogous estimating

Answer: E

Question 720
You are using the three points estimating techniques to estimate the
duration of the scheduled activities. Which of the following statements
are true given the following data?
Pessimistic=200 days
Optimistic days=100 days
Most likely=120 days
Average=140 days
Variance=466.66
   A. The calculations were perform assuming a uniform distribution
   B. Not enough information is provided
   C. The calculation were performed assuming a exponential
      distribution
   D. The calculation were performed assuming a triangular
      distribution
   E. The calculations were performed assuming he beta distribution

Answer: D

Question 721
You are the project manager for the software company that develops
stock analysis software. You have been assigned to develop a new
technical analysis tools to forecast the price of stock given its historical
volatility based on Elliot Wave techniques. You need to gather
necessary information to write the project scope management plan.
Which of the following information do you not need as input to your
current process?
   A. Expert judgment
   B. Project management plan
   C. Market place condition, stakeholder risk tolerance
   D. Historical information
   E. Project charter

Answer: A

Question 722
Which of the following statements are true regarding the critical path
method?
  A. The critical path method calculates the early start, early finish,
     late start, late finish dates, and float times for each activity
  B. The critical path method calculates the early start, early finish,
     late start, late finish dates, and weighted averages for each
     activity
  C. The critical path method calculates the optimistic, pessimistic,
     and most likely duration times for each activity
  D. The critical path method calculates the optimistic, pessimistic,
     and most likely float/ slack times for each activity

Answer: A

Question 723
Which of the following describes the longest path through a project
schedule network after resource leveling?
   A. None of the choices are correct
   B. Critical path
   C. Critical chain
   D. Late finish
   E. Late start

Answer: C

Question 724
You are the project manger at a leading manufacturer of consumer
electronics, personal computers and peripherals. Unfortunately, your
company is facing a rapidly maturing market characterized by
consolidation and commoditization. Hence you have been assigned a
project to drive growth and profit by integrating an online CRM
(costumer relationship management) solution. Industry benchmarks
suggest the CRM solution should generate $100-$300M in bottom the
benefits.
You have just finished developing the risk response plan for the
project. Which of the following is the BEST action to perform next?
   A. Perform Schedule development
   B. Perform a risk audit
   C. Identify the quality standards
   D. Perform a risk reassessment
   E. Develop overall risk ranking for the project

Answer: A

Question 725
All of the following statements are true regarding simulation and
Monte Carlo analysis EXCEPT:
    A. For cost risk analysis, a simulation can use the project WBS or
       cost breakdown structure as its model
    B. For schedule risk analysis, a simulation can use the PDM
       schedule as its model
    C. Simulation is a tool technique of qualitative risk analysis
    D. Modeling and simulation are recommended for use in cost and
       risk analysis because they are more powerful and less subject to
       misuse than EMV analysis
    E. Simulation is a technique that computes the project cost or
       schedule over multiple iterations using random values selected
       from distributions of possible costs or duration values

Answer: C

Question 726
All of the following statements are true regarding the critical path
method EXCEPT:
    A. The critical path method accounts for resource limitations
    B. The critical path method calculates the theoretical early start and
       finish dates for all schedule activities
    C. On a network path, the schedule flexibility is measured by the
       difference between early and late dates
    D. Critical paths have either negative or zero total float
    E. The critical path method performs a forward pass analysis and
       backward pass analysis through the project schedule network
       paths

Answer: C

Question 727
Which of the following statements are FALSE regarding expected
monetary value analysis (EMV)?
  A. Decision tree analysis is a type of EMV analysis
  B. EMV is technique for measuring the performance of work and
     used to establish the performance measurement baseline
   C. EMV is calculated by multiplying the value of each possible
      outcome by its probability of occurrence, and summing them
      together
   D. EMV is a statistical concept that calculates the average outcome
      of project outcomes based on various assumptions and scenarios
   E. EMV is a tool/ technique of Qualitative Risk Analysis

Answer: B

Question 728
You are in the process of identifying and documenting the project roles
and responsibilities and create staffing management plan. All of the
following should be addressed when listing the roles and
responsibilities EXCEPT:
    A. Training needs
    B. Role
    C. Responsibility
    D. Competency
    E. Authority

Answer: A

Question 729
A summary activity describes a group of related schedule activities
aggregated at some summary level, and displayed/ reported as a
single activity at the summary level. What is another term for a
summary activity?
   A. Work activity
   B. Planning package
   C. Hammock activity
   D. Control account
   E. Milestone activity

Answer: C

Question 730
Which of the following best describes the amount of time one can
delay the start of task without delaying the completion of the project?
   A. Lead time
   B. Total slack
   C. None of the choice are correct
   D. Free slack
   E. Lag time
Answer: B

Question 731
With respect to management planning, timing defines how often risk
management process should be performed throughout the project
lifecycle. Which of the following is the key factor affects timing?
    A. Timing should allow results to be developed early enough to
       affect decisions
    B. Timings should be determined by the budget and cost of the
       project
    C. Timings should be determined by the organization's risk
       management policies
    D. Timings should be determined by the size of the project
    E. Timings should be determined by the criticality of the project

Answer: A

Question 732
You are the project manager at a software company developing the
next-gen OODBMS (Object Oriented Data Base Management System).
You are in the process of developing project schedule using CPM
(Critical Path Method).
One of the disadvantages of CPM is that it does NOT consider resource
availability. In fact, you've quickly identified that one of your key
engineers, Michael, is over allocated. Which of the following
statements are true?
   A. You should use crashing in order to resource level the critical
       path tasks
   B. You should use three point estimates in order to reassign the
       resource appropriately
   C. You should use resource leveling heuristics to reassign the
       resource appropriately
   D. You should fast track the process in order to resource level the
       critical path tasks.

Answer: C

Question 733
Which of the following statements are FALSE regarding analogous
estimating techniques?
   A. Analogous estimating is a form of expert judgment
   B. Analogous estimating is a tool and technique of activity definition
      process
   C. Analogous estimating uses the duration of a similar activity to
      determine the duration of current activity
   D. Analogous estimating is also called top-down estimating

Answer: B

Question 734
Reserve analysis is a tool/ technique in all of the following processes
EXCEPT:
  A. Activity duration estimating
  B. Cost estimating
  C. Schedule development
  D. Risk monitoring and control
  E. Cost budgeting

Answer: C

Question 735
All of the following should be included in the initial staffing
management plan as part of human resource planning EXCEPT:
    A. Time frames for project team members
    B. Certifications and trainings need for team members
    C. Assessment of project team's performance
    D. Applicable government regulations, union contracts
    E. Criteria for rewards

Answer: C

Question 736
Which of the following statements are FALSE?
  A. Analogous estimating is a form of expert judgment and is
     generally less accurate than other techniques, but is also costly.
  B. Cost aggregation and parametric estimation is a tool/ technique
     of cost budgeting process
  C. Parametric estimating is an estimating technique using project
     characteristics/ parameters to estimate the total project costs
  D. Cost aggregation is used to ensure that the expenditure of funds
     is reconciled with the funding limits imposed by the performing
     organization

Answer: D

Question 737
You are a project manager at day-old donuts, a rapidly growing
franchise selling premium donuts at a discount. Currently your
company is planning for opening new stores throughout the United
States. You have been asked to open a store in Manhattan, New York.
Construction on a new store is about to begin.
You have determined the dependencies between activities on a
project. One of the activity dependencies is that the trusses on the
building must be installed prior to the installation of the roofing. Which
of the following is true?
   A. This is an example of soft logic
   B. This start-to-finish relationship
   C. This is an example of discretionary logic
   D. This is finish-to-start relationship

Answer: D

Question 738
Probability-impact matrix, risk data quality assessment, risk
categorization, and risk urgency assessment are tool/ techniques of
which process?
   A. Quantitative risk analysis
   B. Risk response planning
   C. Risk identification
   D. Qualitative risk analysis

Answer: D

Question 739
You have been recently assigned to provide an accurate project
schedule for a large construction company. You are evaluating the
network diagrams for the construction project, and are using backward
pass calculations to construct the schedule.
You are trying to calculate the latest start time for laying the
foundation of building. The expected duration for this task is 120 days.
The task must be completed within 300 days, while the expected
completion is between 220 days. The latest finish date is 290 days.
Based on this information, what is the latest start time of this task?
   A. 170
   B. 300
   C. 120
   D. Not enough information is provided
   E. 290

Answer: A
Question 740
You are in the process of developing an approved project schedule that
will serve baseline against which the project can be tracked. All of the
following can be following are required as part of schedule
development EXCEPT:
    A. Reserves
    B. Network diagram
    C. Leads and lags
    D. Resource calendars
    E. Performance measurements

Answer: E

Question 741
Which of the following statements most accurately describes the
difference between plan purchases and acquisitions and plan
contracting?
    A. Plan purchases and acquisitions involves documenting product
       requirements and identifying potential sources, while plan
       contracting involves obtaining quotation, bids, offers, and
       proposals
    B. Plan purchases and acquisitions involves documenting product
       requirements and identifying potential sources, while plan
       contracting is determined what to procure
    C. Plan purchases and acquisitions involves determined what to
       procure, while plan contracting involves documenting product
       requirements and identifying potential sources
    D. None of the choices are correct

Answer: C

Question 742
Poor allocation of time and resources and inadequate quality of the
project plan should be classified in which of the following risk
categories?
    A. Force majeure risks
    B. Technical risks
    C. Project management risks
    D. External risks
    E. Organizational risks

Answer: C
Question 743
All of the following situations will cause schedule activity duration
estimates to directly influence the cost estimates ESCEPT:
    A. When the project budget includes cost of financing components
    B. When planned components and control accounts are not
       adequately defined in the WBS
    C. When union labor with regularly expiring collective bargaining
       agreements are involved
    D. When resources are applied per unit of time for duration of
       schedule activity
    E. When seasonal cost variations are involved

Answer: B

Question 744
Which of the following statements are FALSE regarding the activity
duration estimating process?
   A. The risk register is an input to the activity duration estimating
      process
   B. Duration estimates should be as precise as possible, and hence a
      single specific duration value should be provided
   C. The duration estimates are progressively estimated
   D. Activity duration estimating involves estimating the number of
      work periods that will e needed to complete individual schedule
      activities
   E. The activity cost estimates are an input to the activity duration
      estimating process


Answer: B

Question 745
Which of the following process is used to identify project roles,
responsibilities, and reporting relationships for project team member?
   A. Human resource planning
   B. Activity resource estimation
   C. Acquire project team
   D. Develop project team

Answer: A

Question 746
All of the following statements are true regarding the procurement
management plan EXCEPT:
   A. The procurement management plan explains how multiples
      vendors should be managed
   B. The procurement management plan is an output of the plan
      purchase and acquisition
   C. The procurement management plan defines the statement of
      work which contains the details of the procurement item/ service
      in specific terms
   D. None of the statements are true

Answer: C

Question 747
You are currently in the process of prioritizing risks by their impact and
probability of occurrence. The risk register updates from this process
include all of the following EXCEPT:
   A. Low priority risks
   B. Risks requiring responses in the near term
   C. Risk reassessments
   D. Risk group by categories
   E. Priority list of project risks

Answer: C

Question 748
A WBS is an input to all of the processes EXCEPT:
  A. Cost estimating
  B. Activity definition
  C. Cost budgeting
  D. Scope control
  E. Direct and manage project execution

Answer: E

Question 749
All of the following statements are true regarding cost-reimbursable
contracts EXCEPT:
    A. cost-reimbursable contracts often includes incentives for meeting
       or exceeding project objectives
    B. cost-reimbursable contracts are used when there is little
       uncertainty regarding the project
    C. cost-reimbursable contracts generally carry the highest risks to
       the buyer, as the total costs are uncertain
   D. cost-reimbursable contracts are contracts that involves
      payments to the seller for actual costs, plus a fee representing
      the sellers profit

Answer: B

Question 750
Which of the following statements are FALSE regarding the CPM
method?
  A. The latest start of the task can be determined by subtracting the
     duration of the task from the latest finish date of task
  B. The forward pass is used to calculate the early finish dates and
     early start dates for the uncompleted portions of all network
     activities
  C. Free slack is the amount of time one can delay the start of a
     particular task, without delaying the completion of the project.
  D. The backward pass is used to calculate the late finish dates and
     late start dates for the uncompleted portions of all network
     activities

Answer: C

Question 751
You've been hired as a project manager for a local community college.
The community college wants you upgrade the hardware for each of its
web servers, and install the necessary security patches for each web-
server. You are ready to begin the activity resource estimation process
for your project. Which of the following would you NOT consider when
developing the activity resource requirements document?
   A. Activity lists
   B. Activity attributes
   C. Resource availability
   D. Project management plan
   E. Resource breakdown structure

Answer: E

Question 752
Which of the following statements regarding risk register is FALSE?
  A. The risk register contains the results of qualitative risk analysis,
     quantitative risk analysis, and risk response planning
  B. The risk register is a component of the project management plan
  C. The lowest level of the RBS can be used as the risk register
   D. The risk register provides information on risks regarding the
      probability of occurring, impact on objectives, proposed
      responses, owners and status
   E. The risk register describes all identified risks, along with their
      description, category, and cause

Answer: C

Question 753
Which of the statements regarding the WBS is FALSE?
  A. A WBS from a previous project can often be used as a template
     for a new project
  B. To identify the major deliverables of the project requires
     analyzing the detailed project scope statement
  C. Different deliverables in the WBS can have different level of
     decomposition
  D. The work activity is the lowest level of the WBS and is the point
     at which the cost and schedule for the work can be reliably
     estimated
  E. The WBS is an output of the create WBS process

Answer: D

Question 754
All of the statements regarding control accounts and planning
packages are true EXCEPT:
    A. Planning packages reflect a future segment of work within a
       control account that has not yet been decomposed into detailed
       work packages
    B. A control account is an assigned WBS level used to monitor cost
       and schedule performance of significant element of work
    C. As work becomes more clearly defined, planning packages are
       converted into work packages
    D. Each work package / planning package may be associated with
       only one control account
    E. Control accounts and planning packages are tools / techniques of
       activity definition process

Answer: B

Question 755
Which of the following describes a hierarchically organized
representation of identified project risks arranged by risk categories?
    A. RBS
   B. BOM
   C. OBS
   D. WBS

Answer: A

Question 756
Activity attributes identify multiple attributes associated with each
schedule activity is an output of the activity definition process. All of
the following are considered activity attributes EXCEPT:
    A. Activity identifier, activity codes
    B. Leads and lags, resource requirements, imposed dates
    C. Predecessor activities, successor activities, logical relationships
    D. Activity description, constraints and assumptions
    E. Schedule milestones

Answer: E

Question 757
One of your friends is a project manager at a computer security
company. She is currently managing a project for the development of
a NAC (network admissions control) appliance that uses the network
infrastructure to enforce security policy compliance on all devices
seeking to access network computing resources, thereby limiting
damage from emerging security threats.
Her project team has just completed the initial project budget
identifies the communications requirements, and defined the work
packages. Which of the following would you recommend as the NEXT
BEST action to perform?
    A. Obtain acceptance of project deliverables
    B. Execute work defined in the project management plan
    C. Monitor performance of work packages
    D. Determine the quality standards
    E. Perform risk identification

Answer: D

Question 758
You are using the three-point estimating technique to estimate the
duration of a schedule activity. You are given the following data:
[Pessimistic=100days] | [optimistic=40days] | [most likely=65 days]
Which of the following statements are true?
   A. The beta distribution gives a more pessimistic and more
      conservative value for the mean compared to the triangular
      distribution
   B. Although the triangular distribution gives a more pessimistic
      value for the mean, it gives an estimate with smaller uncertainty
      compared to the beta distribution
   C. The triangular distribution gives a more optimistic and more
      aggressive value for the duration mean compared to the beta
      distribution.
   D. The beat distribution gives an estimate with smaller uncertainty
      compared to the triangular distribution

Answer: D

Question 759
You are in the process of defining how to plan and execute the risk
management activities for your project. Which of the following
statements are FALSE?
   A. The output of this process is the risk management plan
   B. The tools/ techniques of this process are checklist analysis and
      diagramming techniques
   C. The inputs to this process include the project scope statement
      and project management
   D. You are in the risk management planning process

Answer: B

Question 760
Which of the following statements is MOST true regarding Activity A,
considering the following table?




   A.   Activity   A   has a lead
   B.   Activity   A   is behind schedule
   C.   Activity   A   is on the critical path
   D.   Activity   A   has a lag
   E.   Activity   A   is not on the critical path

Answer: E
Question 761
Subnetwork are a term used in reference with which of the following?
  A. Resource requirement
  B. Activity lists
  C. WBS
  D. Network templates

Answer: D

Question 762
You are taking over a project from another project manger during the
project planning process. You've identified that your project team has
already created the WBS, developed estimates for work packages, and
sequenced the project activities using the arrow diagramming method.
In addition, your team has applied schedule network analysis
techniques to create the project schedule. Which action should be
performed NEXT?
   A. Obtain acceptance of completed project scope
   B. Decompose the work packages into smaller components called
      schedule activities
   C. Develop activity resource requirements
   D. Obtain approval of schedule
   E. Initiate schedule change control

Answer: D

Question 763
Which of the following statement are FALSE regarding the probability
impact matrix technique?
  A. The probability impact matrix specifies combinations of
     probability and impact that rank the risk as high, moderate and
     low priority
  B. Either descriptive terms or numeric rankings can be used to
     assign risk rankings to identified risks.
  C. In the probability impact matrix the probability and impacts of
     each risks are accessed against defined scale, and plotted on a
     two-dimensional grid.
  D. Opportunities and threats should not be evaluated in the same
     matrix concurrently.
  E. An organization can rate a risk separately for each objective (i.e.
     cost, time, scope)

Answer: D
Question 764
Which of the following are not used to create the scope baseline for a
project?
   A. WBS dictionary
   B. WBS
   C. Performance reports
   D. Detailed project scope statement

Answer: C

Question 765
The risk management plan is a subset of the project management plan
and describes how risk management should be performed. All of the
following should be included in the risk management plan EXCEPT:
     A. P-l matrix
     B. Budgeting, timing, risk categories
     C. Risk register
     D. Methodology, roles and responsibilities
     E. Stakeholders tolerance, reporting formats

Answer: C

Question 766
You are a project manager for a company that publishes children
books. Five years ago, your company purchased a sophisticated
printing press capable of high-volume production. The company
originally purchased the printing press for $500,000.
However, printing press's current book value is $200,000. The
$200,000 book value is best considered a:
   A. Direct cost
   B. Indirect cost
   C. Fixed cost
   D. Sunk cost
   E. Variable cost

Answer: D

Question 767
You are currently on a 3-week vocation in Australia. You've decided to
rent a car as your means of transport around the country. Driving in a
foreign country can be potentially a risky activity as you are unfamiliar
with the terrain. Hence, the probability of being involved in an accident
is higher. You are very concerned with regards to the financial liability
incurred if you were involved in an accident.
As a project manager, you are aware of various techniques used to
respond to understand risks. You would like to apply your risk
management knowledge to reduce the risks associated with your
driving. Which of the following is the BEST example of risk
transference?
   A. Be extra careful while driving defensively
   B. Avoid driving, use public transportation instead
   C. Accept the risk associated with driving
   D. Buying auto insurance

Answer: D

Question 768
With respect to risk management planning, timing defines how often
risk management processes should be performed throughout the
project lifecycle. Which of the following is the key factor affecting
timings?
   A. Timing should be determined by the criticality of the project
   B. Timing should allow the results to be developed early enough to
      affect decisions
   C. Timing should be determined by the budget and cost of project
   D. Timing should be determined by the size of project
   E. Timing should be determined by the organization's risk
      management policies

Answer: B

Question 769
Qualitative risk analysis requires accurate data as its input. Risk data
quality assessment ranking is a technique to evaluate the degree to
which the data regarding risks would be careful. Risk quality data
assessment involves examining all of the following EXCEPT:
   A. Reliability and integrity of data
   B. Probability of the risks
   C. Extent of understanding of risk
   D. Data available about the risk
   E. Quality of eh data

Answer: B

Question 770
Which of the following statements regarding Resource Breakdown
structure are true EXCEPT:
   A. The RBS is a structure that relates the organizational breakdown
      structure to WBS to ensure that each work component is
      properly assigned to a responsible person/ team.
   B. The RBS is a hierarchical structure of the identified resources by
      resource category and type
   C. The RBS can contain other resource categories other than
      human resources.
   D. The RBS is useful in tracking project costs, and can be integrated
      with the organization's accounting system
   E. The RBS is an output of the Activity Resource Estimation process

Answer: A

Question 771
Which of the following is the MOST likely candidate for a three-point
estimate?
   A. A schedule activity with a fixed duration
   B. A schedule activity with a considerable variation
   C. A well-understand schedule activity with little expected variation
   D. A brief schedule activity that takes a couple of hours

Answer: B

Question 772
All of the following statements regarding Control Accounts are true
EXCEPT:
    A. A control account is an assigned WBS level used to monitor cost
       and schedule performance of significant element of work.
    B. Control accounts are also referred to as cost accounts
    C. None of the choices are correct
    D. A control account is a management control point for cost
       summarization, scope description, and variance analysis and
       reporting.
    E. Each work package/ planning package may be associated with
       only one control account

Answer: C

Question 773
Which of the following describes the longest path through a project
schedule network after resource leveling?
   A. Critical chain
   B. Late finish
   C. None of the choices are correct
   D. Critical path
   E. Late start

Answer: A

Question 774
You are the project manager for an information technology division of
a large financial services firm in the United States. Your company
offers a web based trading platform that provides options and futures
trading for U.S commodities markets. Due to the rise in popularity of
futures and options trading, your company has grown rapidly.
To keep up with the demands you have been assigned with the
responsibility of upgrading company's network and computing
infrastructure. You have given the project charter progressively
elaborated the requirements, and have just completed the Scope
Definition and Create WBS processes. However while you are in the
activity duration process you realized that certain deliverables are
missing from the scope definition and create WBS processes. What is
your next plan of action?
    A. Include the deliverable as part of activity definition project
    B. Review the WBS to include the missing deliverables, and define
       the relevant appropriate activities
    C. Consult the scope management plan to determine how to revise
       the project scope to include this deliverable
    D. Consult your supervisor as to whether to include this deliverable
       as part of the project

Answer: B

Question 775
Which of the following are not tools/ techniques of the activity
definition process?
   A. Expert judgment
   B. Rolling wave planning
   C. ADM, PDM
   D. Decomposition, templates
   E. Planning components

Answer: C

Question 776
You are in the process of numerically analyzing the effects of identified
risks. Which of the following is the LEAST helpful input?
   A. Risk register
   B.   Risk management plan
   C.   Project schedule management plan
   D.   Project scope statement
   E.   Risk related contractual agreements

Answer: E

Question 777
You are the project manger at a software company developing the
next-gen web application server. As software development can be very
chaotic, your company has elected to follow the more rigorous
approach to software development. Specifically, your company has
chosen to adopt the Rational Unified Process (RUP) for your current
software project.
The RUP methodology is highly iterative and produces numerous
deliverables include UML diagrams, architecture diagrams, prototypes,
and test-cases. You have just produced your activity duration
estimates and updated your activity attributes. Which process have
you just finished?
   A. Activity sequencing
   B. Activity duration estimation
   C. Schedule development
   D. Activity definition

Answer: B

Question 778
Which of the following processes involves analyzing activity sequences,
activity duration, and resource requirements, to develop the project
schedule?
   A. Activity sequencing
   B. Schedule development
   C. Scope definition
   D. Activity duration estimation
   E. Activity definition

Answer: B

Question 779
All of the following are constraints that can limit flexibility in human
resource planning EXCEPT:
    A. Templates and checklists
    B. Organizational structure
    C. Economic conditions
   D. Collective bargaining agreements

Answer: A

Question 780
Which of the following statements is true regarding PDM (precedence
diagramming techniques)?
   A. PDM often uses the start-to-start relationship
   B. PDM often uses the finish-to-start relationship
   C. PDM often uses the finish-to-finish relationship
   D. PDM often uses the start-to-finish relationship

Answer: B

Question 781
You are involved in monitoring specific project results to determine
whether they comply with relevant quality standards. You are suing
the control chart to illustrate how the process is behaving over time.
You have constructed your control chart and that all data points are
within upper and lower control limits of chart. In addition, seven
consecutive data points re observed, to be on one side of the mean.
Which of the following is your BEST plan of action?
   A. Compare results from the last quality management plan
   B. No additional action is needed, as the process is within control
   C. Adjust the mean based on the observed data points
   D. Identify the special cause variation

Answer: D

Question 782
Which of the following are the part of WBS dictionary except:
  A. Statement of work to be performed
  B. Code of account identified
  C. Activity attributes
  D. Who is responsible for the work
  E. Schedule milestone

Answer: C

Question 783
Which of the following are not the direct result of managing the team?
  A. Updating and staffing the management plan
  B. Developing input to performance appraisals
  C. Recording the lessons learned
  D. Identifying the recourse requirements
  E. Submitting change request and resolving issues

Answer: D

Question 784
Procurements audits are a tool/ technique of which of the following
processes?
   A. Request Seller Responses
   B. Select Sellers
   C. Plan Purchases And Acquisition
   D. Contract Closure
   E. Contract Administration

Answer: D

Question 785
Which of the following processes is involved with identifying which
quality standards are relevant to the project and devising a plan on
how to meet / satisfy these standards?
  A. Perform quality control
  B. None of the choices are correct
  C. Quality planning
  D. Perform quality assurance

Answer: C

Question 786
You are a project manager for a company that sells online music. Your
project is to develop new content management system that will not
only manage all users purchases and downloads but will automatically
learn the users music interest to make future product
recommendation. In addition your content management system must
scale to support millions of current music downloads a day.
Your team has made a significant progress on the project. You are
preparing the performance of the project to date and have calculated
the following measurement:
PV=4000, EV=3500, AC=3000
Which of the following statement are true?
   A. CV is positive number that implies that your project is under
      budget
   B. CV is a negative number which implies that your project is over
      budget
   C. EAC is negative number which implies that you are spending
      more than originally budgeted
   D. EAC is a positive number that implies that you are spending
      more than originally budgeted

Answer: A

Question 787
The contract management plan is an output of which process?
  A. Plan contracting
  B. Request sellers
  C. Plan purchases and acquisitions
  D. Select sellers
  E. Contract administration

Answer: D

Question 788
The Preliminary Scope Statement which is and output of the
Develop Preliminary Project Scope Statement process, is an input
to all of the following EXCEPT:
   A. Scope verification
   B. Develop project management plan
   C. Scope planning
   D. Scope definition

Answer: A

Question 789
Dennis works for an international manufacturer for consumer
electronics. He has been recently assigned to supervise and manage
the manufacturing of a new model of flat-screen televisions. His
supervisor congratulates Dennis on his expanded responsibilities.
He informs Dennis that his new assignment will have the 1000 units of
the new flat screen manufactured by September. Before Dennis begins
manufacturing these new units he needs to determine the
characteristics of his new product line, such as screen size, color,
resolution e.t.c. which of the following tasks must Dennis perform prior
to manufacturing the product?
   A. Fast-track the project--begin manufacturing the product while
      the requirements are clarified
   B. Submit a RFP to get the detailed requirements
   C. Consult the supervisor for the detailed requirements
   D. Progressive elaborations
  E. Submit a RFQ to get the detailed requirements

Answer: D

Question 790
In which of the following project management process group can
stakeholders be identified?
   A. Planning, monitoring and controlling
   B. Initiating, planning, executing, monitoring and control and
      closing
   C. Initiating, planning and executing
   D. Initiating only
   E. Initiating and planning

Answer: B

Question 791
According to the PMI, which of the following best describes the
differences between programs and projects?
    A. Programs are used to describe projects in a strong matrix
       organization
    B. Programs are group of project managed together managed
       together
    C. There is no difference between program and project. These
       terms are interchangeable
    D. Programs are ongoing operations while projects are temporary
       and unique

Answer: B

Question 792
Which of the following best determines the amount of authority a
project manager will have during a project?
   A. The project manager's negotiating skills and communication
      skills
   B. The priority and importance of the project within the
      organization
   C. Organizational structure
   D. The amount of authority a specified in the project charter.

Answer: C

Question 793
Which of the following best describes the following organizational
structure?




   A.   Strong Matrix Org
   B.   Balanced Matrix Org
   C.   Weak Matrix Org
   D.   Projectized Org
   E.   Functional Org

Answer: E

Question 794
You are the project manager for an information technology division of
a large financial services firm in the United States. Your company
offers a web based trading platform that provides options and futures
trading for U.S commodities markets. Due to the rise in popularity of
futures and options trading, your company has grown rapidly.
To keep up with the demands you have been assigned with the
responsibility of upgrading company's network and computing
infrastructure. You planned to purchase a new high-end mainframe
server. The new server will cost $150,000 and can be used for 10
years. After 2 years the resale value of mainframes will be $100,000.
After 5 years the resale value of server will be $75,000. After 7 years
the resale value of server will be $30,000. After 10 years, the server
will be obsolete.
What is the annual depreciation expense for this server if you use
straight-line depreciation?
    A. None of the choices are correct
    B. 25,000
   C. 150,000
   D. 5,000
   E. 15,000

Answer: E

Question 795
You are the project manager at Happy Coffee Cafe, a rapidly growing
franchise selling premium blended coffee. Currently your company is
planning on opening additional stores throughout Europe. Your
company is evaluating different areas of expansion, including, France,
Germany and England.
You intend to use NPV (net present value) analysis to evaluate which
area provides the base opportunity for expansion. Which of the
following statements are true regarding NPV calculations?
    A. None of the statements are true
    B. If the NPV value is greater than zero, the project is unfavorable
    C. If the NPV value is less than zero, the project is favorable
    D. NPV assumes that the cost of capital is based on LIBOR
    E. NPV is the discount rate when IRR is equal to zero



Answer: A

Question 796
You are a project manager at a historic Shoppe, a rapidly growing
bookstore selling hard to find books and periodicals. Currently your
company is planning on opening additional stores throughout the
United States. Your primary market includes densely populated, major
metropolitan cities.
Your company is deciding among New York, Los Angeles, and Seattle.
Based on data which project should be recommended using the
discounted cash flow technique?
Project New York makes $100,000 in 2 years
Project Los Angeles makes $110,000 in 3 years
Project Seattle makes $120,000 in 4 years
Assume that the cost of capital is 8%
   A. Project New York since it yields the highest value
   B. Project Los Angeles since it yields the highest value
   C. Project Seattle since it yields the highest value
   D. Project Seattle since it yields the highest total cash flow

Answer: C
Question 797
You are the project manager at information technology division of a
large health care provider in the United States. Due to the new
regulatory requirements enacted by HIPAA to ensure the privacy of
confidential medical records, you have been assigned to audit all I.T.
system to ensure compliance.
You need to ensure that all the data in database is encrypted to ensure
confidentially. You need to ensure that all the users are properly
authenticated and authorization to confidential information follows the
least privilege principle.
The deadline to ensure the compliance with HIPAA regulations is within
120 days. Failing to complete the project in 120 days will result fine to
your organization. You have been given a budget of $500,000 dollars.
Due to the overall budget cuts this year, you have been told that the
budget is $500,000 and cannot exceed from this. Which are the
primary constraints for the project?
   A. Scope
   B. Schedule
   C. Budget
   D. Quality

Answer: B

Question 798
You are a part of project software team responsible for developing a
new CRM software application. The project has been ongoing for the
past several months. A few members of the project team are currently
discussing introducing a significant change to one of the major work
packages. After discussions you received a message from the vice
president of engineering informing you of the project changes, and are
asked to complete the necessary paperwork in order to process the
change. This is an example of:
   A. A project expediter role
   B. A configuration management system
   C. Managing stakeholder need
   D. Management by objectives
   E. A change control system

Answer: A

Question 799
According to PMI, application areas are categories of projects that
have been common elements in the majority of projects, but are not
necessarily required or applicable to all projects. Application areas are
not usually defined in terms of:
   A. Technical elements
   B. Functional departments
   C. Supporting disciplines
   D. Project phases

Answer: D

Question 800
Your company manufactures memory chips for workstation computer.
Your project involves manufacturing a very high capacity memory
chip. 128GB. You have worked on he same project two year ago to
manufacture low capacity memory chip.2GB.
You are in the DEVELOP THE PROJECT CHARTER process. Which of the
following inputs is least helpful?
    A. Organizational process assets, standardized guidelines and
       performance measurement criteria's
    B. Historical information on the previous project manufacturing 2GB
       capacity chip. This information could be helpful since this new
       project is similar in nature.
    C. Enterprise environmental factors, such as stakeholders risk
       tolerances and marketplace condition
    D. The project constraints and assumptions to make sure that the
       any significant project risk can be identified and mitigated
    E. The project's preliminary scope statement that document the
       characteristic of the project

Answer: E

Question 801
You are the project manager fro the large children's toy manufacturer.
You have been asked to manufacture the latest craze in "Dancing
Widgets" for upcoming Christmas season. You've been informed that
the company needs at least one month lead time in order to have
Widgets on retailer's shelves for Christmas season. Hence, based on
the current sales forecast you've been asked to deliver 100,000 units
by November 1st at the least. Since the toys will be used by young
children, the "Dancing Widgets" must be manufactured to meet very
specific safety specifications.
Your company drives 90% of if its revenue from sales generated
during the Christmas holiday season. As a result, you have been given
a budget of $15 million dollars to complete this project. Which of the
following is the primary constraint for this project?
  A. Risks, since the widgets must be manufactured to meet very
     specific safety specifications
  B. Time, since the delivery cannot be changed
  C. Scope, since the forecast for 100,000 units may change once
     manufacturing begins.
  D. Cost, since your budget has been fixed at $15 million

Answer: B

Question 802
Which of the following statements are true?
  A. Changes to product scope and defined in the integrated change
     control plan
  B. Changes to product scope are a result of implementing
     corrective actions
  C. Workaorounds are used to correct problems that occur with
     changes in the project scope
  D. Changes to the product scope should be reflected in the project
     scope

Answer: D

Question 803
You've been hired as manager to design and construct a new casino in
Las Vegas, over the next 18 months. Given the size of the project and
the abbreviated time frame, you are attempting to identify ways to
reduce the timeframes for many of various tasks. You've developed
the WBS and created a Gantt chart using specialized scheduling
software.
After analyzing the data, you've discovered several opportunities
where tasks and phases may be overlapped in order to save time. This
is an example of:
    A. Progressive elaboration
    B. Resource elaboration
    C. Fast tracking
    D. Crashing and schedule

Answer: C

Question 804
Your company manufactures memory chips for workstation computers.
Your current project involves manufacturing a very high capacity
memory chip (128GB). You worked on the same project three years
ago to manufacture a lower capacity memory chip (2GB). You've
received a project charter from your supervisor. Which of the following
statements are FALSE?
   A. None of the choices are correct
   B. The project charter should describe the summary budget for the
      project
   C. The project charter does not provide you with functional power
      over various departments
   D. The project charter should describe the summary milestone
      schedule for the project
   E. The project charter grants you the authority to begin assigning
      resources to the project

Answer: A

Question 805
During which phase of the project lifecycle is the level of risk and
uncertainty is highest?
  A. Closing
  B. Controlling
  C. Initiating
  D. Executing
  E. Planning

Answer: C

Question 806
Which of the following are not inputs to the develop preliminary
project scope statement?
  A. Project management plan
  B. Organizational process asset
  C. Enterprise environmental factors
  D. Project charter
  E. Project statement of work

Answer: A

Question 807
You are the Chief Technology Officer of a major stock exchange. You
have just completed the WBS, and WBS dictionary with respects to
reengineer the organization's back office accounting, billing, and
administrative systems. Which of the following is the BEST NEXT plan
of action?
   A. Develop the activity lists
   B. Identify the projects stakeholders
   C. Begin completing the work packages
   D. Complete risk management activities
   E. Perform scope verification

Answer: A

Question 808
The project charter, either directly, or by reference to other
documents, should address all of the following EXCEPT:
   A. Internal/ external project constraints
   B. Summary budget
   C. Resource calendar
   D. Summary milestone schedule
   E. Stakeholder influence

Answer: C

Question 809
You are the project manager at a utility company. Due to the recent
rise in the cost of petroleum, your organization is exploring cheaper,
alternative forms of energy. You have just completed the project
Scope Planning process and created the Scope management plan.
However, upon review, you have determined that the resulting project
scope management plan is ambiguous and poorly written. A poorly
written project scope management plan will directly impact all of
the following EXCEPT:
   A. Ability to define, prepare and integrate, all subsidiary plan, into
       the project management plan
   B. Ability to formalize acceptance of the project deliverables
   C. Ability to create a detailed project scope statement as the basis
       for future project decisions.
   D. Ability to control changes to the project scope
   E. Ability to identify the necessary activities that needs to be
       performed to produce project deliverables

Answer: A

Question 810
You are the project manager at Day-Old donuts a rapidly growing
franchise selling premium donuts at a discount. Currently, your
company is planning on opening additional stores throughout Europe.
Your company is evaluating different areas for expansion including
France, Germany and England. Your steering committee used a
weighted score model and found that in England with a score of 75,
provided the best opportunities for expansion. Which of the following
statements are true?
   A. Weighted scoring models are constrained optimization method,
      and is tool/ technique of the initiation process group
   B. Weighted scoring models are benefit measurement method, and
      is input to the initiation process group
   C. Weighted scoring models are constrained optimization method,
      and is an input to the initiation process group
   D. Weighted scoring models are benefit measurement method, and
      is tool/ technique of the initiation process group

Answer: D

Question 811
Projects are typically authorized as a result of one or more of the
following needs:
    A. All choices are correct
    B. Customer requests
    C. Legal requirements
    D. Technological advance
    E. Social needs

Answer: A

Question 812
Which of the following best describes progressive elaboration?
  A. Process of soliciting proposals from prospective sellers and
     vendors
  B. None of the choices are correct
  C. Process of identifying the characteristics of products
  D. Process of starting a new task prior to the completion of current
     project tasks

Answer: C

Question 813
You are in the process of directing the performance of planned project
activities and managing the various technical and organizational
interfaces that exist within your project. All of the following are
outputs of this process EXCEPT:
   A. Final product, service or result
   B. Implemented defect repair, work performance information
   C. Requested changes, implemented change request
   D. Deliverables
   E. Implemented corrective actions, implemented preventive actions

Answer: A

Question 814
Which of the following statements are TRUE regarding comparative
methods, scoring method, and cash flow analysis?
  A. These are included as part of the product description
  B. These are project selection criteria
  C. These are considered as expert judgment
  D. These are outputs of the initiating process group
  E. These are project selection methods

Answer: E

Question 815
You are the project manager within an information technology
department of a retailer. In order to allow for better real-tracking, in
inventory control, and supply chain management, your company in
financing a project a project to install and deploy RFID on all items of
merchandise. As the project manager you're in select sellers process,
and have 4 different vendors on your qualified sellers list. One of the
vendors on your list has invited you to lunch. What should you do?
   A. You can accept the invitation, as there shouldn't conflict of
      interest with this invitation.
   B. You should decline the invitation, as this may give an
      appearance of a conflict of interest.
   C. You should decline the invitation, as you have not selected a
      vendor yet. This may give an unfair advantage to the seller.
   D. You should decline the invitation, as this may give appearance of
      impropriety.

Answer: A

Question: 816

You are the project manager within an information technology
department of a large retailer In order to allow for better real-tracking,
in inventory control, and supply chain management, in inventory
control, and supply chain management, your company in financing a
project to install and to install and deploy RFID on all items of
merchandise. As the project manager, you've just completed the select
sellers' process, and selected a vendor to perfume the RFID installation
and deployment.
After the contract is singed with the vendor, the account manager
from the vendor calls to thank you for selected them. As a thank-you
gift, they'll be sending you round-trip ticket to Hawaii for you and your
family. How should you respond?
       A. You should not accept the gift, unless the vendor is willing to
          extend this gift to other members of the project team
       B. You should not accept the gift, as it may give an appearance
          of impropriety.
       C. You should freely accept the gift, as long as you tell the
          vendor to give you a gift privately.
       D. You can freely accept the gift, since you were not aware of the
          gift during the selection process. The gift did not decision, and
          hence, there is no impropriety.

Answer: B

Question: 817
Michael works as a project manager at the construction company
development a suspension bridge for the city of Chicago. He has asked
the couple of his team-mates to return to the warehouse to pick up
additional supplies. The ware is close to where Michael lives, so he has
asked his team-mates to also stop by his home to help clean the
debris from his driveway. Is Michael's behavior the PMI code of ethics?
       A. Michael is not in violation since Michael is just trying to utilize
          his resources in the most efficient manner possible
       B. Michael is not in violation since there is no conflicts of
          interests in his action
       C. Michael is in violation since he is inappropriately using
          resources for his own personal benefit
       D. Michael is not in violation since the primary reason for the
          trip is work-relater. The secondary requests do not take
          much time or resources

Answer: C

Question: 818
You are project manager at a construction company who is working in
a foreign country to perform reconstruction work for various
infrastructure and utility services, including water, sewage, and
electricity. You've been in the foreign country for a couple of week,
and are beginning to feel disoriented. Which of the following best
describes your experiences?
         A. Cultural disorientation
         B. Post-traumatic
        C. Exhaustion
        D. Geographic shock
        E. Culture shock

Answer: E

Question: 819
One of key activities for achieving customer satisfaction is to define
the:
   A. Project status
   B. Business use
   C. Change control
   D. Quality metrics
   E. Requirements

Answer: E

Question: 820
You are a contract project manager within an information technology
department of a large retailer. You are responsible for developing a
new e-commerce web-site for the retailer. You are in the process of
selecting the vendor who will provide the hardware including computer
servers and networking equipment. As the project manager, you are in
the select sellers process and have three vendors on your qualified
sellers list who have responded to your company's RFP.
One of the vendors remaining on the qualified sellers list is NetComp.
Although you have no financial interests in this company, one of your
friends Dennis is an investor of this company. Is there a conflict of
interest in this situation?
    A. Because of your friendship with Dennis a conflict of interests
       exists that must be disclosed immediately.
    B. Depending on the depth of friendship with Dennis, a conflict of
       interest could exist.
    C. In order to protect your privacy, you only have to disclose your
       relationship with NetComp Inc. if you are directly questioned
    D. Since neither you nor your family members have any financial
       interest in the company, there is no conflict of interest

Answer: D

Question 821
Which of the following is used to maintain an index of contract
documents and correspondence, and assist with retrieving and
archiving contracts documentation?
 A.   configuration management system
 B.   contract management system
 C.   record management system
 D.   PMIS
 E.   Payment system

Answer: C

Question 822
Which of the following are tools to contract closure process?
 A. Contract documentation
 B. Performance reporting
 C. Project report
 D. Procurement audit
 E. Contract file

Answer: D

Question 823
You are a project manager at a large accounting firm in United States.
Throughout the year your firm provides both consulting services and
accounting services to XYZ widgets, inc, a publicity traded company
listed on a New York stock exchange. Currently your project involves
auditing and financial statements to XYZ widgets, in the preparation of
annual shareholders meeting.
Your team has just completed the financial auditing of the firm, and
recently published its finding. You have performed this project under
contact and are in the contract closure process. Which of the following
should you document as a part of contract closure process?
  A. Formal deliverable acceptance
  B. Performance measurement
  C. Requested contract changes
  D. Payment schedules and request

Answer: A

Question 824
Which of the following project management areas contains the manage
stakeholders process?
 A. Project communication management
 B. Project time management
 C. Project integration management
 D. Project scope management
 E. Project procurement management
Answer: A

Question 825
Which of the following are inputs to the close project process except:
 A. Deliverables
 B. Final product, service or result
 C. Work performance information
 D. Project management plan
 E. Contract documentation

Answer: B

Question 826
Which of the following best describes the complete set of indexed
contract documentation, including the closed contract, for inclusion
with the final project file?
 A. Lessons learned documentation
 B. Contract file
 C. Procurement audits
 D. Contract closure procedure
 E. Contract management plan

Answer: B

Question 827
Which of the following are not considered as enterprise environmental
factor?
 A. Stakeholder risk tolerance
 B. Organization communication requirements
 C. Marketplace condition
 D. Work authorization system
 E. Existing human resource

Answer: B

Question 828
You have been hired as a project manger for a local community
college. The community college wants you to design and develop a
custom student registration web site, so that student can select and
register for their classes online.
Your project is nearly complete. However near the end of the project
your team experienced some technical difficulties that caused cost
overrun and schedule delays. This information may be useful in future
projects in all of the following activities except:
 A. Create WBS
 B. Product verification
 C. Cost estimating
 D. Activity estimating

Answer: B

Question 829
According to the PMI which of the following is considered as a special
case of contract closure?
 A. Contract fraud
 B. Contract default
 C. Contractual non performance
 D. Early termination of contract
 E. Contract bankruptcy

Answer: D

Question 830
Earned value analysis is performance reporting tools used in manage
stakeholder process. Which of the following measurement should be
used as a performance measurement baseline?
  A. SPI
  B. PV
  C. AC
  D. CPI
  E. EV

Answer: B

Question 831
Which of the following statements are true regarding project ending?
 A. Starvations occur when the resources (personal, equipment,
    property e.t.c)of the project are reassigned to the other areas
    within the organization or other places
 B. Extinction occur when the project end because it was completed
    successfully and accepted by stakeholders
 C. Subtraction occurs when resources are removed from the project,
    such as due to funding/ resource cuts
 D. Integration occurs when the project revolves into ongoing
    operation
Answer: B

Question 832
You r the project manager at a large accounting firm in the United
States. Throughout the year your firms provides both the consulting
services and accounting/auditing services to XYZ Widgets, Inc, a
publicity traded company listed on a New York stock exchange.
Currently your project involves auditing and financial statements to
XYZ widgets, in the preparation of annual shareholders meeting.

While your team is in the midst of project execution, you are informed
that your project is cancelled due to new SEC regulations. Specially a
new SEC rule prohibits accounting firm from providing both auditing
services and consulting services to the client, due to the potential
conflicts of interest that could rise from such business relationship.

As a result your project is cancelled and budget for your project is cut.
For necessary budget your project team is banned and your project
members go their separate ways. Which of the following types of
project ending is this considered?
 A. Addition
 B. Extinction
 C. Integration
 D. Cancellation
 E. Starvation


Answer: E

Question 833
Which of the following establishes the procedure to perform product
verification, update contract records to reflect final results and archive
information for future use?
 A. Formal acceptance documentation
 B. Contract closure procedure
 C. Project files
 D. Administrative closure procedure

Answer: B

Question 834
Which of the following statements are false regarding contract closure
procedure?
 A. The contract closure procedure is an output of closure project
    process
 B. None of the choices are correct
 C. The contract closure procedure involves both product verification
    and administrative closure
 D. The contract closure procedure is an input of closure project
    process
 E. The contract terms and conditions may prescribes specification for
    contract closure

Answer: B

Question 835
You are the project manager within an information technology
department of a large retailer. In order to allow for better real-time
tracking, inventory control, and supply chain management, your
company is financing a project to install and deploy RFID tags on all
items of merchandise. As a project manger, you've just completed the
Select Sellers process, and selected a vendor to perform the RFID
installation and deployment.
After the contract is assigned with the vendor, the account manager
from the vendor calls for thank you for selecting them. As a thank-you
gift, they would like to give you and your project team tickets to a free
dinner convention, where the vendor will be providing a demo if their
latest RFID systems. How should you respond?
    A. Since the previous project manager had accepted the gift, the
       precedent has already been established within the organization.
       Hence, you can freely accept the gift.
    B. You can freely accept the gift, since you were not aware of the
       gift during the selection process. The gift will not influence your
       decisions, and hence, there is no impropriety
    C. You should not accept the gift, unless the vendor is willing to
       extend this gift to other members of the project team
    D. You should not accept the gift, as it may have an appearance of
       impropriety

Answer: D

Question 836
You are the project manager at a large automaker in Japan. Your
project involves designing the next generation 4-wheel drive Sport
Utility vehicle for the Asian market. A new fuel efficient engine design
is required as part of your project. Unfortunately, your project team
did not have the necessary expertise to design and manufacture a new
fuel-efficient engine.
Hence, your company plans has decided to subcontract all the engine
designs an outside manufacturer in Europe. During your initial visits to
European partners, you were presented with an expensive gift. You
were told that this is local custom to give such gifts to business
partners to during their visits. What should you do?
   A. Since the gift will not influence your future decisions, you can
      accept the gift as there is no conflict or interest
   B. Since accepting the gift may give the appearance of impropriety
      you should decline the gift outright
   C. Accept the gift so as not to offend anyone. However, report the
      gift to appropriate parties at your company so that you do not
      give the appearance of impropriety
   D. Explain that the gift may be constructed as a conflict of interest
      and hence you cannot accept the gift

Answer: C

Question 837
You are the project manager within and information technology
department of a large retailer. You are responsible for updating the
network infrastructure of the company. As a project manager, you are
in the Select Sellers process, and have four different vendors on your
qualified sellers list.
One of the vendors on your list has invited you to lunch to a very high-
class and expensive restaurant. In fact, a meal can cost anywhere
from $500-$1000 USD. What should you do?
    A. You should review your company's policy on the type of gifts you
       can accept
    B. You can accept the invitation, as there shouldn't conflict of
       interest with this invitation
    C. You can accept the invitation, since such lunch invitations are
       generally okay, regardless of how expensive the meal is.
    D. You should decline the invitation, as this may give appearance of
       impropriety
    E. You should decline the invitation, as you have not selected a
       vendor yet. This may give an unfair advantage to the seller

Answer: A

Question 838
Michael works as a project manager at a construction company
developing a new 150 story sky-scraper. He has asked a couple of his
team members to return to warehouse to pick additional supplies.
Since one of his team members is an expert electrician and since
warehouse is close to where the Michael lives, he has asked his team
mates to also stop by his house to fix some very minor electrical
problems in his house. Is Michael behavior violating the PMI code of
ethics?
   A. Michael is not violating since the primary reason for the trip is
      work-related. The secondary request do not take much time or
      resources.
   B. Michael is not in violation since there is no conflicts of interests
      in his actions
   C. Michael is not in violation since Michael is just trying to utilize his
      resources in the most efficient manner possible
   D. Michael is in violation since he is inappropriately using resources
      for his own personal benefit

Answer: D

Question 839
You are the project manager within an information technology
department of a large retailer In order to allow for better real-tracking,
in inventory control, and supply chain management, in inventory
control, and supply chain management, your company in financing a
project to install and to install and deploy RFID on all items of
merchandise. As the project manager, you've just completed the select
sellers' process, and selected 5 different vendors on your qualified
sellers list who has responded to your company's RFP.
One of the vendors remaining the qualified sellers list is RFID-PM Inc.
although you have no financial interest in this company, one of yours
old high school buddies, Terence, sits on the board of directors of this
company. Is there a conflict of interest in this situation?
    A. Depending on the depth of your friendship with Terence, a
       conflict of interest could exist
    B. In order to protect your privacy, you only have to disclose your
       relationship with RFID-PM, Inc. if you are directly questioned
    C. Since neither you nor your family members has any financial
       interests in this company there is no conflict of interest
    D. Because of your friendship with Terence, a conflict of interest
       exist that must be disclosed immediately

Answer: C

Question 840
You have determined that a design error will interface with meeting
technical performance objectives. Which of the following is the
preferred response in this situation?
   A. Simplify the overall technical complexity of the project
   B. Develop alternative solutions to address the problem
   C. Ignore the error and set new performance objectives
   D. Reduce performance objectives to be equal to the current
      assessed value

Answer: B

Question 841
Which of the following tool/ technique are unplanned responses to
risks that were previously unidentified?
   A. Workarounds
   B. Corrective actions
   C. Risk database
   D. Project risk reviews
   E. Risk response audits

Answer: A

Question 842
Which of the following statements are true regrinding issue logs?
  A. Issue logs describe the ground rules and conflict management
     procedures to manage the project.
  B. Issue logs are written logs that address the roles and
     responsibilities of each project team member.
  C. Issue logs are tool/ technique of the Manage Project Team
     process and Manage Stakeholders process.
  D. Issue logs are a graphic display of project team members and
     their reporting relationships.

Answer: C

Question 843
The Monitor and Control Project Work process is performed to monitor
project processes and performance. Which of the following are you
LEAST concerned with during this process?
   A. Maintaining the integrity of baselines by releasing only approved
      changes
   B. Providing information to support status reporting
   C. Analyzing and tracking project risks
  D. Assessing performance to determine whether corrective actions
     are necessary
  E. Comparing actual performance against project management plan

Answer: A

Question 844
Which of the following are not tools/ techniques of Manage
Stakeholders process?
   A. Communications method
   B. Status review meetings
   C. None of the choices are correct
   D. Issue logs

Answer: B

Question 845
You are in the process of monitoring the various project processes and
their performance. Which of the following is the LEAST appropriate
output of this process?
   A. Recommended defect repair
   B. Recommended preventive actions
   C. Recommended corrective actions
   D. Forecasts
   E. Project management plan updates

Answer: E

Question 846
Your friend is a project manager at a real estate company that
develops and manages commercial, retail and residential properties in
United States and Europe. As a company continues to grow, the
company's IT infrastructure is unable to meet business needs of
organization.
Hence she has been assigned to upgrade the company's IT
infrastructure. Specifically, her team has been asked to implement a
corporate general ledger system, improve accounting and real estate
processes, develop a lease tracking system, and implement HR and
payroll systems and perform diagnostics and monthly closures.
Her project team has already completed all the initiating / project
planning activities and received sign-off/ approvals on the project
charter, project scope, and detailed work packages. Your project team
is in the process of completing all the work packages.
However, she has just received a change request to add additional
reporting functionality to the project deliverables. She calls a meeting
of her project team to determine how to proceed with the change. This
is an example of which of the following?
    A. Proper integrated change control
    B. Lack of change control system
    C. Inadequate levels of decomposition of work packages
    D. Management by objectives
    E. Team consensus building

Answer: B

Question 847
Which of the following forecasts the most likely total project costs
based on the current project performance to date?
   A. CV
   B. VAC
   C. EV
   D. SV
   E. EAC

Answer: E

Question 848
You are in the process of controlling changes to the project scope. All
of the following are outputs of this process EXCEPT:
   A. Project management plan updates
   B. Performance reports
   C. Recommended corrective actions
   D. Scope baseline updates
   E. Requested changes

Answer: B

Question 849
You are the project manager at a manufacturer of electronic
components. Your company had been a long time market leader in
electronic components distribution industry. However, in recent years,
the Internet has transformed the competitive landscape. As a result
company's market share has been eroding.
Hence, your current project involves implementing the company's
internet strategies to best exploit these altered dynamics and increase
the company's market share. You are in the project planning process,
and are personally estimating the time needed for each activity. Once
you've created the overall project estimate. You commit to completing
the project deliverables to this date. Which of the following BEST
explains why this is the INCORRECT way to estimate the schedule?
   A. The project sponsor should have been actively involved in
      producing the estimates
   B. The estimates should have come form the project team
      members
   C. The estimates should have been created by management
   D. The estimate should have accounted for the market dynamics
      and timing requirements

Answer: B

Question 850
Which of the following statements are TRUE regarding the scope
verification statement?
   A. Scope verification involves evaluating overall project
       performance to ensure that the project will satisfy specified
       project requirements
   B. None of the statements are true
   C. Scope verification is primarily concerned with verifying the
       correctness of work results
   D. The tool/ technique of scope verification is inspection

Answer: D

Question 851
All of the following are sources of conflict EXCEPT:
    A. Scheduling priorities
    B. Ground rules
    C. Personal work styles
    D. Scarce resources

Answer: B

Question 852
You have been assigned to a project to build a large 30-story
condominium in Las Vegas. The condominium will feature luxurious
amenities like state of the art work-out facilities, conference centers,
valet services, maid services, spas, gourmet dining and resort style
pools.
You've calculated the estimated project completion date. However, the
estimated completion date is 2 months after the desired completion
date. After analyzing the project network diagram, you've determined
that many of the activities have discretionary dependencies. To
decrease the project duration, you've requested additional resources
but were told that NO additional resources are available for your
project. Assuming that the project has low risks, which of the following
is the BEST plan of action?
     A. Reduce the quality of deliverables
     B. Omit risk management activities
     C. Omit a project activity
     D. Perform schedule activities in parallel
     E. Crash the schedule

Answer: D

Question 853
You are in the process of controlling changes to the project schedule.
All of the following are outputs of this process EXCEPT:
    A. Schedule baseline updates
    B. Performance measurements
    C. Schedule model data
    D. Schedule model data updates
    E. Activity list updates

Answer: C

Question 854
You would like to measure the association between tow variables.
Which of the following is NOT a measuring technique or measure you
would use to do this?
   A. Correlation
   B. Standard deviation
   C. Scatter diagram
   D. Regression

Answer: B

Question 855
Which of the following best describes residual risks?
  A. None of the choices are correct
  B. Risks that still remain after implementing a risk response
  C. Risk that come about as a direct result of implementing a risk
     response
  D. Risks that arise due to quality issues

Answer: B
Question 856
You are the project manager in the I.T department of the local
university. Your current project involves developing a web-based
interface for legacy student registration application.
Your current project has recently experienced a change where you
have been asked to support an additional data base system, instead of
current database system in use. As a result, many of the greed upon
WBS elements were modified. Which type of change has occurred
within your project?
   A. Scope change
   B. WBS update
   C. Project change
   D. Schedule change
   E. Quality change

Answer: A

Question 857
To ensure the effectiveness of corrective actions, corrective actions
frequently require which of the following?
   A. Resource leveling
   B. Root-cause analysis
   C. Performance measurements
   D. Rebaselining project schedule baseline
   E. Rebaselining project cost baseline

Answer: B

Question 858
Which of the following statements are true regarding the Pareto
diagrams?
   A. Pareto diagram involves using mathematical techniques to
      forecast future outcomes based on historical results
   B. Pareto diagrams use statistical measurements to identify the
      most important problems through different measurement scales;
      i.e. frequency, cost, e.t.c. and directs attention and efforts to
      most significant problems and/ or opportunities
   C. Pareto diagram illustrate the relationship between two variables
   D. Pareto diagrams are created by randomly selecting random
      portions of a population for inspection

Answer: B
Question 859
Keeping up with the growth was becoming a problem for a privately
owned Chinese financial services company. Although it easily lured
business from state-owned competitors, low skill levels and weak
accounting systems threaten the company's cash flow. Moreover,
poorly invested assets were delivering inadequate returns.
Hence, you have been assigned over an existing project to upgrade
the IT system to allow for an expansion. Specifically, the IT upgrade
will enable the company to serve more competitors, expand the
product line, gain market share, and win more licenses.
You've determined the following information so far: Activity X has an
early start of day3, early finish of day6, and a late finish of day10.
Activity Y is being performed by resource that had been very difficult
to obtain. The CPI of the project is 1.2 and the SPI is 1.3.
Midway through your project, your client has requested additional
deliverables to your project. Fortunately, you have already determined
that this functionality will only add one extra week to the critical path.
To accommodate this request, you've determined that you could fast-
track the schedule to recover one extra week. Which of the following
should you perform NEXT?
   A. Consult the project sponsor before taking action
   B. Investigate other options on how to implement the change
       requests with minimal impact to the project
   C. Inform the client the impact of the change
   D. Evaluate the impact of the change request on the other project
       constraints
   E. Implement the change request

Answer: A

Question 860
Which of the following are true regarding the critical path EXCEPT:
  A. Critical path activities that are delayed can result in a negative
     float
  B. A critical path can run over a dummy activity
  C. Changes to the end date of the project may not require a change
     to the project network
  D. None of the choices are correct
  E. A project can have multiple critical paths

Answer: D

Question 861
Which of the following statements are FALSE regarding Project Time
Management?
  A. Activity resource estimating involves estimating type and
     qualities of resources required to perform each schedule activity
  B. Schedule development involves analyzing activity sequences,
     durations, resource requirements in order to create project
     schedule
  C. None of the choices are correct
  D. Activity sequencing involves identifying dependencies among
     schedule activities
  E. Schedule cost involving changes to the project schedule

Answer: C

Question 862
Which of the following statements are TRUE:
  A. Budget updates are a special category of revised cost estimates
  B. Revised cost estimates are modifications to the cost information
     used to manage the project.
  C. If cost variances are severe, rebaselining may necessary in order
     to provide a better measure of performance
  D. The cost change control system is an input to the Cost Control
     process.

Answer: D

Question 863
You are project manager responsible for constructing a new sports
arena for the upcoming Olympics. Construction began on a project
over a year ago. The stakeholders of the project want a status report
on the performance of the project to date. You've obtained the
following measurements:
BAC=500, ETC=200, PV=500, AC=200, EV=300, CPI=1.5
Based on the measurements above, which of the following statements
are TRUE?
   A. The cost performance of the project is better than expected
   B. The schedule performance of the project is worse than expected
   C. The schedule performance of the project is better than expected
   D. The cost performance of the project is worse than expected

Answer: A, B

Question 864
Which of the following statements are FALSE regarding quality audits?
  A. Quality audits are used to identify lessons learned
  B. Quality audits are used to determine the progress of the project
     and identify corrective actions
  C. Quality audits are used to review quality management activities
  D. Quality audits are tools/ techniques of the Perform Quality
     Control process.

Answer: D

Question 865
Project cost control includes all of the following EXCECPT:
   A. Recording all changes to the cost baseline
   B. Inform stakeholders of approved changes
   C. Influencing factors that create changes to the baseline
   D. Bringing expected cost overruns within acceptable limits
   E. Establish contingency reserves that allow for unplanned, but
      potentially required, changes

Answer: E

Question 866
Which of the following statements best describes the responsibility of
the Change Control Board (CCB)?
   A. The CCB is responsible for approving/ rejecting changes to the
      project charter
   B. The CCB is responsible for approving/ rejecting change requests
   C. The CCB is responsible for approving/ rejecting changes to
      project schedule/ cost baseline
   D. The CCB is responsible for approving/ rejecting changes to the
      WBS
   E. The CCB is responsible for approving/ rejecting changes to
      project plan

Answer: B

Question 867
You are a project manager for a company that sells online music. Your
project is to develop new content management system that will not
only manage all users purchases and downloads but will automatically
learn the users music interest to make future product
recommendation. In addition your content management system must
scale to support millions of current music downloads a day.
Your team has made a significant progress on the project. You are
preparing the performance of the project to date and have calculated
the following measurement:
PV=4000, EV=3500, AC=3000
What is the CPI of the project?
   A. 1.333
   B. 0.75
   C. 0.875
   D. 1.16
   D. 1.14

Answer: D

Question 868
The Estimate At Completion (EAC) can be used to forecast the most
likely total project cost based upon the current project performance.
Which of the following formulas cannot be used to calculate the EAC
when current project variances are NOT typical and such variances
NOT expected to continue?
    A. EAC=(AC+(VAC-EV)/CPI)
    B. EAC= AC+BAC+PV
    C. EAC=(AC+(BAC-EV)/CPI)
    D. EAC= AC+BAC-EV
    E. EAC=AC + ETC

Answer: D

Question 869
Which of the following techniques may NOT be used to a project to
resolve conflicts?
   A. Withdrawal
   B. Directing
   C. Compromise
   D. Forcing

Answer: B

Question 870
All of the following are part of scope baseline EXCEPT:
    A. Product analysis
    B. WBS dictionary
    C. Project scope statement
    D. WBS
Answer: A

Question 871
Which of the following statements are TRUE?
  A. Team building activities and general management skills are tool
     techniques of the Manage Project Team process
  B. None of the choices are correct
  C. The Develop Project Team process involves tracking team
     member performance, providing feedback and coordinating
     changes to improve project performance
  D. Management of the project team is complicated when team
     members are accountable to both a functional manger and
     project manager within matrix organization

Answer: D

Question 872
Which of the following best describes a win-lose conflict resolution
technique that uses formal power to command/ demand a specific
solution to a problem?
A. Forcing
B. Smoothing
C. Withdrawal
D. Confrontation
E. Compromise

Answer: A

Question 873
Which of the following is the configuration management activity that is
involved with capturing, storing, and accessing configuration
information needed to mange products?
   A. Configuration management
   B. Configuration definition
   C. Configuration verification and auditing
   D. Configuration status accounting
   E. None of the choices are correct

Answer: D

Question 874
Keeping up with the growth was becoming a problem for a privately
owned Chinese financial services company. Although it easily lured
business from state-owned competitors, low skill levels and weak
accounting systems threaten the company's cash flow. Moreover,
poorly invested assets were delivering inadequate returns.
Hence, you have been assigned over an existing project to upgrade
the IT system to allow for an expansion. Specifically, the IT upgrade
will enable the company to serve more competitors, expand the
product line, gain market share, and win more licenses.
You've determined the following information so far: Activity X has an
early start of day3, early finish of day6, and a late finish of day10.
Activity Y is being performed by resource that had been very difficult
to obtain. The CPI of the project is 1.2 and the SPI is 0.9. Based on
the information above, which of the following areas should cause the
MOST concern?
   A. Quality
   B. Float
   C. Cost
   D. Schedule
   E. Resources

Answer: D

Question 875
Integrated change control includes the following activities EXCEPT:
   A. Validated defect repair
   B. Documenting impact of requested changes
   C. Regulating the flow of requested changes
   D. Maintaining the integrity of the baselines by releasing approved
      changes
   E. Providing information to support status reporting

Answer: E

Question 876
Which of the following statements are FALSE regarding configuration
management?
  A. Configuration definition provides the basis from which the
     configuration of products is defined and verified, products and
     documents are labeled, changes are managed, and
     accountability s maintained.
  B. Configuration status accounting provides the basis for capturing,
     storing and accessing configuration information needed to
     manage products
  C. Configuration verification and auditing provides the basis for
     ensuring that the performance and functional requirements
     defined in the configuration documentation have been met
   D. The configuration management system is a subsystem of the
      overall project management information systems.

Answer: A

Question 877
Keeping up with the growth was becoming a problem for a privately
owned Chinese financial services company. Although it easily lured
business from state-owned competitors, low skill levels and weak
accounting systems threaten the company's cash flow. Moreover,
poorly invested assets were delivering inadequate returns.
Hence, you have been assigned over an existing project to upgrade
the IT system to allow for an expansion. Specifically, the IT upgrade
will enable the company to serve more competitors, expand the
product line, gain market share, and win more licenses.
Your project team has already created the WBS, developed estimates
for the work packages, and created the project network diagram.
Which of the following should you perform NEXT?
   A. Decompose the work packages into smaller components called
       schedule activities
   B. Finalize risk management activities
   C. Identify logical relationship among activities
   D. Implement schedule change control system
   E. Create the preliminary project schedule

Answer: E

Question 878
All of the following statements regarding quality metrics are true
EXCEPT:
    A. None of the choices are correct
    B. Examples of quality metrics include test coverage, reliability,
       defect density, failure rate, and availability
    C. Quality metrics are an input to the Perform Quality Assurance
    D. Quality metrics are an input to the Perform Quality Control
    E. Quality metrics are an output to the Quality Planning

Answer: A

Question 879
You are presented the following schedule data regarding various
project activities on a critical path:
You are told that the project has negative float of 4 months. What is
the minimum amount it will cost to save four months by crashing the
project?


   A.   10,000
   B.   8,000
   C.   7,000
   D.   6,000
   E.   9,000

Answer: D

Question 880
Which of the following defines, the procedures by which the cost
baseline may be change, including the paperwork, tracking systems,
an approval levels for authorizing changes?
   A. Cost baseline
   B. RAM
   C. Scope management plan
   D. Cost change control system
   E. Cost management plan

Answer: D

Question 881
Your project is nearing completion when a previously undocumented
risk is identified. The risk could negatively affect the outcome of the
project. Which of the following is the BEST action to perform next?
   A. Create a workaround
   B. Develop a risk response plan to mitigate the risk
   C. Add reserves to the project to adjust for the risks
   D. Notify the management team about the impact of the risk
   E. Analyze the risk
Answer: E

Question 882
You are in the process of controlling changes to the project cost
baseline. Which of the following is the LEAST helpful tool/ technique?
   A. Cost aggregation
   B. Forecasting, variance management
   C. Performance measurement analysis
   D. Cost change control system
   E. Project performance reviews

Answer: A

Question 883
Which of the following statements are FALSE regarding the cost
change control system?
   A. Integrated change control system
   B. It provides information on the project scope and cost
      performance, such as which budgets have been met and which
      are not.
   C. It defines the procedures by which the cost baseline may be
      changes
   D. It defines the approval level necessary for authorizing the
      changes
   E. It should be integrated into the integrated change control
      system

Answer: B

Question 884
You are in the process of controlling changes to the project scope. All
of the following are tools/ techniques you can use EXCET:
   A. Replanning
   B. Change control system
   C. Inspection
   D. Configuration management system
   E. Variance analysis

Answer: C

Question 885
Which of the following processes involves ensuring that risk plans are
properly executed?
   A.   Risk   monitoring and control
   B.   Risk   response planning
   C.   Risk   identification
   D.   Risk   management planning

Answer: A

Question 886
All of the following statements are true regarding the configuration
control board (CCB) EXCEPT:
    A. A CCB has the authority to improve or reject requests
    B. A CCB members may include stakeholders, managers and
       project team members
    C. A CCB is a collection of procedures that describe how to submit
       change requests
    D. A CCB describes how change requests will be managed and
       tracked

Answer: C, D

Question 887
You are the project manager at a large investment bank. Your current
project involves developing a creative financing solution for a large
bio-tech company in order to facilitate the acquisition of another
company. Specifically, your project involves issuing convertible debt
securities in order to access a new pool of low-cost capital. This
transaction is the largest ever convertible transaction in the bio-tech
company. Unfortunately, your project is plagued by frequent changes
to project charter. Who should be primary person responsible for
deciding whether the changes to the project charter are necessary?
   A. Project manager
   B. Change control board
   C. Project team
   D. Project sponsor
   E. Stakeholders

Answer: D

Question 888
All of the following are outputs of the Risk Monitoring and Control
process EXCEPT:
    A. Requested changes
    B. Recommended preventive actions
    C. Recommended corrective actions
   D. Work performance information
   E. Risk register updates

Answer: D

Question 889
With respects to the cost of quality, which of the following individuals
was responsible for developing the "zero-defects" approach?
   A. Deming
   B. Inshikawa
   C. Crosby
   D. Juran

Answer: C

Question 890
Which of the following tools/ techniques of the quality planning process
compares previous similar activities from a prior project to the current
project activities to develop performance measurement standards?
   A. Benchmarking
   B. Design of experiments
   C. Flowcharting
   D. Benefit/ cost analysis

Answer: A

Question 891
Which of the following statements are true regarding collocation?
  A. Collocation is a tool/ technique of the acquire project team
     process.
  B. In order to be effective, collocation must take the link between
     project performance and reward clear and achievable.
  C. Collocation involves placing project team members in the same
     physical location to enhance their ability to perform as a team
  D. Collocation is a tool/ technique of Human Resource planning
     process.

Answer: C

Question 892
Which of the following statements are true regarding Quality Planning
and Perform Quality Assurance?
   A. The quality planning process uses the tool such as benefit costs
      analysis, benchmarking, flow charting, and design of experiment
      and cost of quality
   B. Quality planning involves evaluating overall project performance
      to ensure that the project will satisfy quality standards
   C. Quality planning is the totality of characteristic of an entity that
      bear on its ability to satisfy stated or implied needs. Quality
      assurance involves evaluating overall project performance to
      ensure that the project will satisfy quality standards
   D. Quality assurance involves evaluating overall project
      performance to ensure that the project will satisfy quality
      standards

Answer: D

Question 893
Which of the following statements are true regarding the Expectancy
theory?
   A. Hygiene factors help avoid job dissatisfaction but will not lead to
      job satisfaction.
   B. Individuals will only put efforts into a certain behavior/ action
      dependent upon expectancy, valence, and instrumentality.
   C. Individuals are satisfied by unsatisfied needs, and that certain
      lower needs to be satisfied before higher needs can be satisfied.
   D. Individuals are motivated by achievement, power and affiliation.

Answer: B

Question 894
You are in the process of making information available to project
stakeholders in a timely manner. Which of the following statements
are true?
   A. Forecasts and performance reports are outputs of this process
   B. Cost reporting systems and time reporting systems are tools/
      techniques you can use in this process.
   C. You need the communications management plan as one of the
      process inputs
   D. You are in the Project Monitoring and Controlling process group

Answer: C

Question 895
Which of the following statements are FALSE regarding contracts?
   A. The major components of a contract generally include
      acceptance criteria, warranties, performance bonds, and
      disputes resolution mechanisms.
   B. A contract can be in the form of simple purchase order
   C. A contract is mutually binding legal document
   D. A project manager should be the lead negotiator on the contract.
   E. A contract is an output of the Select Sellers process.

Answer: D

Question 896
The project management executing processes include all of the
following EXCEPT:
    A. Select sellers, cost budgeting
    B. None of the choices are correct
    C. Perform Quality Assurance, Develop Project Team
    D. Inform distribution, Request Sellers Responses

Answer: A

Question 897
You are in the process of directing the performance of the planned
project activities and managing the various technical and
organizational interfaces that exist within your project. All of the
following actions that you should perform in this stage EXCEPT:
    A. Manage risks and implement risk response activities
    B. Staff, train, and manage project team members assigned to
       project
    C. Create and validate project deliverables
    D. Prepare the project statement of work
    E. Obtain and manage resources including tools and equipment

Answer: D

Question 898
Consider the Project Integration Management knowledge area. Which
of the following process are NOT included?
    A. Schedule Control
    B. Develop Project Management Plan
    C. Close Project
    D. Direct and Manage Project Execution
    E. Integrated Change Control

Answer: A
Question 899
You are the project manager for the manufacturer of children's toys.
Your project team is in the process of designing a new toy for children
for next year's Christmas season.
Your 5-members are working together for past six months and has
become a complete self-directed team with little, if any management
supervision required. All five members are in constant communication
with each other.
How many lines of communications are their in your project team?
   A. 15
   B. 20
   C. 10
   D. 5

Answer: C

Question 900
All of the following are tools/ techniques of the develop project team
process EXCEPT:
    A. Conflict management
    B. Team building activities
    C. Recognition and rewards
    D. Ground rules
    E. Co-location

Answer: A

Question 901
Which of the following statements are true regarding Delphi technique?
  A. Delphi technique provides a way to reach the consensus among
     experts and allow the experts to participate anonymously
  B. Delphi techniques may un-intentionally increase the data
     collection
  C. Delphi technique requires that the participants be together in the
     same room.
  D. The Delphi technique helps prevent anyone person from unduly
     influencing the outcome

Answer: A, D

Question 902
Negotiation, preassignment, and acquisition are tools and techniques
of which of the following processes?
  A.   Acquire Project Team
  B.   Develop Project Team
  C.   Human Resource Planning
  D.   None of the choices are correct

Answer: A

Question 903
You are the project manager responsible for renovating a 70-year old
building. You intend to hire an outside construction firm to seismic
retrofit the building in order to make sure that the building can
withstand the large earthquakes. The outside construction firm has
requested SOW. Which of the following statements are FALSE
regarding the contract SOW?
   A. The SOW contains the objectives of the project
   B. The outside construction firm requires a SOW to determine
       whether they have the capabilities to meet the detailed
       specifications of the project.
   C. As a buyer, you are required to write the contract SOW
   D. The SOW contains a description of the seismic retrofit designs

Answer: C

Question 904
You have just completed the project planning process group and you
are ready to begin the project executing process group. You'll need to
perform all of the following EXCEPT:
   A. Develop Project Team
   B. Direct And Manage Project Execution
   C. Perform Quality Assurance
   D. Acquire Project Team
   E. Manage Project Team

Answer: E

Question 905
You are the project manger at a leading manufacturer of consumer
electronics, personal computers and peripherals. Unfortunately, your
company is facing a rapidly maturing market characterized by
consolidation and commoditization. Hence you have been assigned a
project to drive growth and profit by integrating an online CRM
(costumer relationship management) solution. Industry benchmarks
suggest the CRM solution should generate $100-$300M in bottom the
benefits.
As the project comes to an end, you've determined that the CPI is 1.2
and SPI is 1.1. In addition, you've determined that the project team
has added six reporting capabilities and functionalities that were
overlooked in the project management plan. Upper management is
very satisfied with the results of your project. Which of the following
BEST describes the project's success?
   A. The project was a definite success since the project was under
      budget and ahead of schedule
   B. The project was unsuccessful since it was gold plated
   C. The project was unsuccessful since the project was over project
   D. The project was definite success since the stakeholders were
      satisfied with the project results

Answer: B

Question 906
Which of the following best describes the Achievement Theory of
motivation?
  A. People are motivated by achievement, power and affiliation
  B. People are motivated by five basic, hierarchical needs
  C. People are motivated by hygiene factors
  D. People are motivated by expectation of positive outcomes

Answer: A

Question 907
In which of the following process is the qualified sellers list developed?
   A. Select Sellers
   B. Plan Contracting
   C. Request Sellers Responses
   D. Plan Purchase And Acquisition

Answer: C

Question 908
Which of the following describes an input to the direct and manage
project execution process that consists of documented, authorized
directions that reduce the probability of consequences associated with
project risks?
   A. Implement corrective actions
   B. Approved corrective actions
   C. Implemented corrective actions
   D. Approved corrective actions
   E. Implemented change requests
Answer: D

Question 909
You are in the process of obtaining the necessary human resources to
complete the project. Which of the following are NOT outputs of this
process?
   A. Team performance assessment
   B. Resource availability
   C. Updates to staffing management plans
   D. Project staff assignments

Answer: A

Question 910
You are a project manager for the manufacture of children's toys. Your
project team is in the process of designing a new children toy for New
Year Christmas season.
With the rapidly approaching deadline, your team members are
frequently arguing with each other. However, recently your team has
just begun to work well together. There appears to be a sense of team
cohesion and friendliness. Your team members are able to express
criticisms constructively, and able to work out their differences. Which
of the following stages of develop project team best describes your
team?
     A. Storming
     B. Norming
     C. Performin
     D. None of the choices are correct
     E. Forming

Answer: B

Question 911
You have just completed the project planning process group, and you
are ready to begin the project executing process group. You'll need to
perform all of the following executing processes EXCEPT:
   A. Improve competencies of team members
   B. Develop options to reduce risk/ threats to project objectives
   C. Apply quality activities to ensure that the project employs all
      processes required to satisfy requirements
   D. Obtain human resources needed to complete project
   E. Make necessary information available to stakeholders ina timely
      manner
Answer: B

Question 912
Which of the following are TRUE regarding Bidder conferences?
  A. Bidder conferences are meeting with prospective seller after
     preparation of bid or a proposal
  B. Bidder conferences are tool/technique of request seller response
     process
  C. Bidder conferences are outputs of request seller response
     process
  D. Bidder conferences involves the receipt of bids or proposals and
     the application of the evaluation criteria in order to select a
     vendor

Answer: A

Question 913
You have been recently hired to be a project manager at a bio-tech
company to develop treatment for diabetes. George is the voice
president of R&D. he tell you that your project is over budget and that
you need to reduce salary expenses by $500K. Which type of power is
George yielding in order to influence your decisions?
   A. Legitimate power
   B. Coercive power
   C. Referent power
   D. Punishment power
   E. Expert power

Answer: A

Question 914
All of the following statements regarding Bidder conferences are TRUE
EXCEPT:
    A. All potential sellers are given equal standing during this process
    B. Bidder conferences are meetings with prospective sellers prior to
       preparation of a bid or proposal
    C. Bidder conferences are also called contractor conferences and
       vendor conferences
    D. Bidder conferences are used to ensure that sellers have a clear
       understanding of the project requirements
    E. Bidder conferences are tool/ technique of Select Seller Process

Answer: E
Question 915
You are the project manger at a biotech company, where you are
leading a cross-functional team to develop a treatment for diabetes.
The organization has a weak matrix structure, where all of your project
team members report to different functional managers and none of the
team member report to you directly. Your project has extremely high
visibility in the company, and there is a lot of pressure on you to
deliver on time and within budget.
However, you are quiet new to the company joining company just 3
weeks before. Hence you are concerned whether you'll have necessary
authority and power to complete the project deliverables. Which of the
following types of powers will be MOST effective in your situation?
     A. Legitimate power
     B. Expert power
     C. Referent power
     D. Punishment power

Answer: A

Question 916
Which of the following statements are FALSE regarding quality audits?
  A. Quality audits examines how the project is progressing and
     makes corrections
  B. The objective of quality audit is to identify lessons learned
  C. Quality audits are generally performed after scope verification,
     but can also be performed in parallel with scope verification
  D. Quality audits are a structured review of other quality
     management activities

Answer: C

Question 917
You are in the process of reviewing offers and choosing among
potential sellers. All of the following are tools/ techniques you can use
in this process EXCEPT:
    A. Method for preparing own independent estimates of costs
    B. Methods for estimating minimum requirements of performance
       for one or more evaluation criteria when selecting a prospective
       seller
    C. Methods for quantifying quantitative data to minimize any biases
       when performing seller selection
    D. Methods to evaluate sellers on past performance and contractual
       compliance
   E. Methods to determine whether product can be produced by
      project team or purchased from external source

Answer: E

Question 918
You are the project manager for a company that sells online music.
The company is growing so well that the company has outgrown its I.T
infrastructure. In fact, the company's current infrastructure is unable
to handle the terabytes of music download each day.
As a result, the company has decided to outsource its music download
infrastructure to a third party content management vendor. The
content management vendor will host the compressed music files
across its geographically distributed web server farms, and handle all
the logistics with music file downloads and data streaming.
On your qualified sellers list, you have identified one potential vendor
MusikCM. Your procurement department is conducting an independent
estimate of costs of the proposals in order to compare the vendor
prices. However, your procurement department has identified a large
difference between the independent estimate and the proposed vendor
cost. Which of the following statements are FALSE?
    A. The SOW did not contain the enough detail
    B. The vendor failed to respond to all the requirements specified in
       the proposal/ bid
    C. The terms of the contract did not contain enough details
    D. The vendor failed to respond to all items in the SOW
    E. You are currently in the request seller responses process

Answer: B

Question 919
Which of the following statements are NOT true regarding corrective
actions?
   A. Corrective actions are outputs of processes in the controlling
      process group
   B. Corrective action is used to bring expected future project
      performance in line with the project plan
   C. Corrective actions are tools/ techniques of the direct and
      manage project execution process
   D. Approved corrective actions are inputs to the direct and manage
      project execution process

Answer: C
Question 920
Evaluation criteria are an input to the Select Sellers process. Which of
the following is LEAST likely an example of an evaluation criteria?
   A. Review of supplier's history
   B. Samples of supplier's previously produced products
   C. Review of supplier's delivery performance
   D. Review of procurement document package

Answer: D

Question 921
Proposals are seller prepared documents that describe the seller's
ability to provide requested services. Which of the following processes
is used to elicit the proposal?
    A. Request seller responses
    B. Select sellers
    C. Plan contracting
    D. Plan purchases and acquisitions

Answer: A

Question 922
Which of the following statements are false regarding the Close Project
process?
   A. The close project process documents the reasons for actions
      taken if a project is terminated early
   B. In multi-phase projects, the close project process closes out the
      associated activities applicable to a given project phase
   C. The close project process is necessary for managing the contract
      and relationship between the buyer and seller
   D. The output of the close project includes two procedures:
      administrative closure procedure and contract closure procedure
   E. The close project process establishes the procedures to verify
      and document the project deliverables

Answer: C

Question 923
You are in the process of completing and selling each contract, and
resolving any open items. All of the following are inputs you require
EXCEPT:
   A. Performance reports
   B. Contract documentation
   C. Contract closure procedure
  D. Procurement management plan
  E. Contract management plan

Answer: A

Question 924
You are the project manager at a large accounting firm in the United
States. Throughout the year your firm provides both consulting
services and accounting/ auditing services to XYZ Widgets, Inc, a
publicly traded company listed on the New York Stock Exchange.
Currently, your project involves auditing the financial statements of
XYZ Widgets Inc, in preparation for the annual shareholders/ investors
meeting.
Your team has just completed the financial auditing of the firm, and
recently published its findings. With this project completed, you have
just been given your next project assignment. Which of the following
statements are true?
   A. Your project ended due to addition
   B. Your project ended due to starvation
   C. Your project ended due to completion
   D. Your project ended due to extinction
   E. Your project ended due to integration

Answer: D

Question 925
You are currently in the closing process and are involved in the
product verification. Which of the following best describes the purpose
of product verification?
   A. To verify whether the work was completed correctly
   B. To verify the goals of the project and verify whether the product
      meets requirements
   C. To evaluate the work and compares the results to the project
      cost baseline
   D. To evaluate the work and compares the results to the project
      scope baseline

Answer: A

Question 926
In which process is formal acceptance and handover of the final
product/ service performed?
   A. Scope verification
   B. Close project
   C. Contract administration
   D. Contract closure

Answer: B

Question 927
Product verification is usually performed in the closing process. Which
of the following best describes its purpose?
   A. Product verification is a method for quantifying qualitative data
      to minimize the effect of biases during select sellers
   B. Product verification provides management with information
      about how effectively the seller is achieving the contractual
      objectives
   C. Product verification is used to verify that work was completed
      correctly and satisfactorily.
   D. Product verification includes samples of the suppliers previous
      products for the purpose of providing a way to evaluate a
      supplier's capabilities

Answer: C

Question 928
Which of the following establishes the formal documentation as to why
the project was terminated and formalizes the procedures for
transferring the unfinished delivers of the cancelled project?
   A. Project files
   B. Historical information
   C. Project closure documents
   D. Formal acceptance documentation

Answer: C

Question 929
Earned value analysis is a performance reporting tool/ technique used
in the Manage Stakeholders process. Which of the following
performance measurements is derived by the following formula:
(EV/PV)?
    A. VAC
    B. SV
    C. SPI
    D. CV
    E. CPI

Answer: C
Question 930
Which of the following best describes the project integration
Management Knowledge Area?
  A. Activity definition, activity sequencing, schedule control
  B. Communications planning, information distribution, performance
     reporting, manage stakeholders
  C. Develop project management plan, direct and manage project
     execution, integrated change control
  D. Human resource planning, acquire project team, develop project
     team

Answer: C

Question 931
All of the following are outputs of the close project process EXCEPT:
    A. Formal acceptance documentation
    B. Contract closure procedure
    C. Administrative closure procedure
    D. Final product, service or result
    E. Deliverables

Answer: E

Question 932
According to the PMI, early termination of a contract is considered a
special case of:
   A. Contract cancellation
   B. Contract severance
   C. Contractual severance
   D. Contract default
   E. Contractual non-performance

Answer: B

Question 933
Which of the following statements are false regarding the records
management system?
  A. A records management system defines the process by which the
     contract can be modified
  B. A records management system is a tool/ technique of contract
     administration and contract closure
  C. A records management system is used to manage contract
     documentation and records
  D. A records management system maintains an index of contract
     documents and correspondence

Answer: A

Question 934
Which of the following process is involved with the completion and
settlement of the contract?
   A. Manage stakeholders
   B. Contract closure
   C. Contract administration
   D. Performance reporting

Answer: B

Question 935
Contract documentation are an input to the contract closure process.
Which of the following are NOT included as part of the contract
documentation?
   A. Contract changes
   B. Supporting schedules
   C. Invoices and payment records
   D. Seller response reports
   E. Contract file

Answer: E

Question 936
Which of the following statements are true regarding project endings?
  A. Integration occurs when a project evolves into ongoing
     operations
  B. Extinction occurs when resources are removed from the project,
     such as due to funding/ resource cuts
  C. None of the choices are correct
  D. Addition occurs when the resources (personnel, equipment,
     property, etc) of the project are reassigned to other areas within
     the organization or other projects
  E. Completion occurs when the project end because it was
     completed successfully and accepted by stakeholders

Answer: C

Question 937
Which of the following is NOT considered an organizational process
asset?
   A. Financial controls procedure
   B. Project closure guidelines
   C. Stakeholders risk tolerance
   D. Performance measurement criteria's
   E. Risk control procedures

Answer: C

Question 938
The purpose of lessons learned documentation, that is an output of the
contract closure process, is all of the following EXCEPT:
   A. Document acceptance of work results
   B. Evaluate project goals and compare them to project deliverables
   C. Review success and failure
   D. Document possible improvements for future projects

Answer: A

Question 939
Which of the following are not tools/techniques of the develop project
charter process?
 A. expert judgment
 B. PMIS
 C. Project management methodologies
 D. Project selection methods
 E. Stakeholder analysis

Answer: E

Question 940
You are a project manager at for an information technology division of
a large financial brokerage in the United States. Due to new regulatory
requirements enacted by Sarbanes-Oxley you have been assigned to
audit all I.T. systems to ensure compliance. You need to ensure that
all data in the data base in encrypted to ensure confidentially. You
need to ensure that all users are properly authenticated. You also need
to verify that authorization to confidential financial information follows
the least-privilege principle.
The deadline to ensure compliance with Sarbanes-Oxley regulations is
within 180 days. Failing to complete the result in 180 days will result
in the significant fines to your organization. You have been given a
budget of $2 million dollars. Due to the overall budget cuts this year,
you have been told that budget is fixed and cannot be increased by
$1000 dollars. Which is the primary constraint for this project?
 A. Schedule
 B. Budget
 C. Scope
 D. Quality

Answer: A

Question 941
Which of the following statements are not true?
 A. In a strong matrix organization, project mangers have little or no
    formal authority
 B. Project managers have low to moderate level of authority in a
    Balanced Matrix organization
 C. Project managers have high level of authority in a projectized
    organization
 D. In a weak matrix organization, conflicts between functional
    managers and project managers are common.

Answer: A

Question 942
Which of the following best describes the following organizational
structure?




 A.   Functional Org
 B.   Strong Matrix Org
 C.   Weak Matrix Org
 D.   Projectized Org
 E. Balanced Matrix Org

Answer: D

Question 943
Projects are typically authorized as a result of one or more of the
following needs:
 A. Technological advance
 B. Marketing needs
 C. All of the choices are correct
 D. Business needs
 E. Legal requirements

Answer: C

Question 944
Your company develops large commercial and industry real estate. In
you current project, you have been asked to manage the construction
of a 30-story office building. Which document describes the business
needs for this project, identifies key deliverables, and gives you
authority to begin the project and start assigning resources?
  A. Work break down structure
  B. Executive summary
  C. Project charter
  D. Ishikawa document
  E. Work authorization form

Answer: C

Question 945
Dennis works for an international manufacturer of consumer
electronics. He has been recently assigned to supervise and manage
the manufacturing of a new model of flat-screen televisions. His
supervisor congratulates Dennis on his expanded responsibilities.
He informs Dennis that his new assignment will have the 1000 units of
the new flat screen manufactured by September. What of the following
is true regarding Dennis's new assignment?
 A. His assignment cannot be considered a project since his flat-screen
     televisions are not a unique product for the company
 B. His assignment cannot be considered a project since his
     assignment is to supervise the manufacturing of a new and unique
     line of products
 C. His assignment cannot be considered a project since his project
     has no clear end-date
 D. His assignment cannot be considered a project because this
    product line has never been manufactured by this company.

Answer: B

Question 946
According to PMI, application areas are categories of projects that
have common elements in the majority of project, but are NOT
necessarily required or applicable to all projects.
Application areas are NOT usually defined in terms of:
 A. Industry groups
 B. Management specializations
 C. None of the choices are correct
 D. Technical elements
 E. Functional departments

Answer: C

Question 947
Your company manufactures CPU for high-end workstation computers.
Your current project involves manufacturing a very high speed CPU
(~10GHZ). You worked on a similar project three years ago to
manufacture a lower speed CPU (~2GHZ).
You are in the develop project charter process. Which of the following
inputs are LEAST helpful?
 A. Historical information on the previous manufacturing 2GHZ chips.
    This information could be helpful since this project is similar in
    nature
 B. The project's preliminary project scope statement which defines
    the scope of the project
 C. The project's statement of work (SOW), which includes the product
    scope description
 D. The project constraints and assumptions to make sure that the any
    significant project risks can be identified and mitigated
 E. Data on market place conditions to make sure that the market
    really exists for this new 10GHZ chips.

Answer: B

Question 948
You are the project manager at Happy Coffee Cafe, a rapidly growing
franchise selling premium blended coffee. Currently, your company is
planning on opening additional stores through the United states. Your
target markets primarily include densely populated metropolitan areas.
Your company is evaluating different areas for expansion, including
New York, San Francisco, and Seattle. Based on your market analysis
you have obtained the following information:
New York-IRR (45%), payback period (1.5 years)
San Francisco-IRR (32%), payback period (1.1 years)
Seattle-IRR (36%), payback period (0.75 years)

Based on this data which area is best for Happy Coffee Cafe?
 A. San Francisco since the IRR is the lowest
 B. New York since IRR is highest
 C. Seattle since payback period is shortest
 D. New York since the payback period is the longest

Answer: B

Question 949
Which of the following statements are true?
 A. The payback period calculations do not consider the time value of
    money
 B. IRR calculations do not consider the time value of money
 C. Discounted cash flow calculation do not consider the time value of
    money
 D. NPV calculation do not consider the time value of money

Answer: A

Question 950
According to the PMI, which of the following are NOT true with regards
to programs and projects?
 A. Projects consists of one or more related programs
 B. Programs often include elements of ongoing operations
 C. Programs are groups of project managed together
 D. Programs may involve a series of repetitive undertakings

Answer: A

Question 951
Which of the following are not inputs to the develop preliminary
project scope statement?
 A. Organizational process assets
 B. Enterprise environmental factors
 C. WBS
 D. Project charter
 E. Project statement of work
Answer: C

Question 952
You are the project manager at Day-Old donuts a rapidly growing
franchise selling premium donuts at a discount. Currently, your
company is planning on opening additional stores throughout Europe.
Your company is evaluating different areas for expansion including
France, Germany and England.
You need to give the presentation to the steering committee to discuss
which areas provide the best opportunities for expansion. For each of
the three locations, you have been asked to determine the discount
rate at which the present value of future cash flows of an investment
equal to the cost of investment. What is this considered?
 A. Weighted scoring model
 B. IRR
 C. NPV
 D. Payback period

Answer: B

Question 953
You are the project manager for an information technology division of
a large financial services firm in the United States. Your company
offers a web based trading platform that provides options and futures
trading for U.S commodities markets. Due to the rise in popularity of
futures and options trading, your company has grown rapidly. In fact,
due to rapid growth, the company's I.T. infrastructure is unable to
meet the growing demands.
To keep up with the demands you have been assigned the
responsibility of upgrading the company's network and company's
infrastructure. You have been asked to calculate the payback period
for the project that is to be completed in the next 24 months.
The IRR of the project is 12% and the annual savings will be $2million.
The total cost of project will be $6million dollars. The cost of capital
used by the company during previous projects is 5%. What is the
payback period for this project?
 A. 2 years
 B. 3 years
 C. 4.5 years
 D. 5.5 years
 E. 4 years

Answer: B
Question 954
Subject matter experts are resources that can provide very valuable
information to the project. In which scope-statement processes are
subject matter experts first utilized?
 A. Scope control
 B. Create WBS
 C. Scope planning
 D. Scope definition
 E. Scope verification

Answer: C

Question 955
The Preliminary Scope Statement which is and output of the
Develop Preliminary Project Scope Statement process, is an input
to all of the following EXCEPT:
   A. Scope definition
   B. Integrated change control
   C. Scope planning
   D. Develop project management plan

Answer: B

Question 956
Which of the following statements about fast-tracking is TRUE?
 A. Fast tracking refers to assigning additional resources to a project
    in an attempt to decrease project schedule/ timeline
 B. Fast tracking is the process of increasing the schedule by
    overlapping various project tasks
 C. One of the advantages of fast-tracking is that it can often lead to
    reduced rework and reduces project risks
 D. None of the statements are true
 E. Fast tracking involves performing activities sequentially

Answer: D

Question 957
Which of the following statements are true regarding the risk break
down structure?
  A. The risk break down structure represents a hierarchically
     organized representation of identified project risks arranged by
     risk impact
  B. None of the statements are true
   C. The risk break down structure identifies all elements of risk
      activities that will be documented and audited.
   D. The risk break down structure describes the format and content
      of risk register

Answer: B

Question 958
You are the project manager for the software company that develops
stock analysis software. You have been assigned to develop a new
technical analysis tools to forecast the price of stock given its historical
volatility based on Elliot Wave techniques. You need to gather
necessary information to write the project scope management plan.
Which of the following tools/ techniques will NOT be useful for you in
this process?
   A. Project management plan
   B. Templates
   C. Standards
   D. Forms
   E. Expert judgment

Answer: A

Question 959
Fragment network area term used in reference with which of the
following?
    A. Resource requirements
    B. WBS
    C. Network templates
    D. Activity lists

Answer: C

Question 960
Schedule model data, which is an input of the schedule development
process, includes all of the following EXCEPT:
   A. Schedule milestones, schedule activities
   B. Contingency reserves
   C. Alternative schedules
   D. Activity attributes, constraints and assumptions
   E. Risk register

Answer: E
Question 961
What is the total slack for activity D, considering the following table?




   A.   None of the choices are correct
   B.   5
   C.   10
   D.    77
   E.   72

Answer: E

Question 962
Which of the following statement are FALSE regarding the probability
impact matrix technique?
  A. Opportunities and threats should not be evaluated in the same
     matrix concurrently
  B. The probability impact matrix is a tool/ technique of the
     quantitative risk analysis process
  C. Either descriptive terms or numeric rankings can be used to
     assign risk rankings to identified risks
  D. An organization can rate a risk separately for each objective (i.e.
     cost, time, scope)
  E. The probability impact matrix specifies combinations of
     probability and impact that rank the risk as high, moderate and
     low priority

Answer: B

Question 963
You have been recently been assigned to provide an accurate project
schedule for constructing a new 50-story casino, in Las Vegas,
Nevada. You are evaluating the network diagram for the construction
project, and are using the forward pass calculations to construct the
schedule.
You are trying to calculate the earliest start time for laying the
foundation of the building. The expected duration for this task is 150
days. The task must be completed within 300 days, while the expected
completion is within 220 days. The latest finish time is 200 days.
Based on this information, what is the earliest start time of this task?
  A. Not enough information is provided
  B. 150
  C. 200
  D. 300
  E. 50

Answer: E

Question 964
Which of the following is the BEST candidate for a three-point
estimate?
   A. A schedule activity with a considerable variation
   B. A brief schedule activity that takes a couple of hours
   C. A schedule activity with a fixed duration
   D. A schedule activity with little duration variation

Answer: A

Question 965
Which of the following is an estimating technique that uses a statistical
relationship between historical data and other variables to calculate an
estimate for activity parameters such as duration and cost?
   A. Bottom-up estimates
   B. Influence diagrams
   C. SWOT analysis
   D. Analogous estimating
   E. Parametric estimating

Answer: E

Question 966
You are in the process of identifying and documenting the project roles
and responsibilities and create staffing management plan. All of the
following are tools/ techniques you can use EXCEPT:
    A. RACI
    B. Organizational theory
    C. Networking
    D. Negotiation
    E. RBS

Answer: D
Question 967
Which of the following statements are true regarding Management
Reserves?
  A. Management Reserves are part of the project management plan
     and is usually displayed as a S-Shaped curve
  B. Management Reserves are used to ensure that the expenditure
     of funds is reconciles with the funding limits imposed by the
     performing organization
  C. Management Reserves describes the differences between the
     maximum funding and the end of the cost baseline
  D. Management Reserves is a technique for measuring the
     performance of work and is used to establish the performance
     measurement baseline

Answer: C

Question 968
You are in the process of developing an approximation of the costs of
the resources needed to complete each schedule activity. All of the
following are outputs of this process EXCEPT:
    A. Cost management plan updates
    B. Activity cost estimates
    C. Activity cost estimate supporting detail
    D. Requested changes
    E. Cost baseline

Answer: E

Question 969
Which of the following statements are true regarding cost estimating
techniques?
   A. None of the choices are true
   B. Bottom up estimating is a technique that uses statistical
      relationship between historical data and other variables to
      calculate a cost estimate.
   C. Analogous estimating is generally more costly than other
      techniques but produces more accurate estimates
   D. Parametric estimates involves estimating the cots of individual
      work packages at the lowest level of detail, and "rolling up" and
      summarizing the costs at higher levels

Answer: A

Question 970
You are in the process project a project schedule for repainted your
house, you first need to scrap off the existing paint, and then add a
layer of primer. The primer provides the paint a better bonding surface
so it sticks to the base material much better. Without priming, drywall
surfaces will soak up more finish paint in some areas than in others,
producing a splotchy effect.
You decided to speed up the process by starting priming before all the
scraping is finished. To correctly sequence these activities, which of
the following should you do?
   A. Add float time between the priming and painting tasks
   B. Fast track the priming and painting tasks
   C. Ad lag time to the priming task
   D. Add lead time to the priming task

Answer: D

Question 971
The risk register is initiated in the Risk Identification process and
further updated in the Qualitative Risk analysis and Quantitative Risk
analysis processes. Which of the following are NOT risk register
updates as part of the Quantitative Risk Analysis process?
   A. Risk categorization
   B. Trends in quantitative risk analysis results
   C. Probability of achieving cost and time objects
   D. Probabilistic analysis of the project
   E. Prioritized list of qualified risks

Answer: A

Question 972
Which of the following statements are true regarding the scope
baseline for a project?
   A. The scope baseline is an output of the create WBS process.
   B. The scope baseline is an output of the scope verification process
   C. The scope baseline is an input of the create WBS process
   D. The scope baseline is an input of the scope verification process
   E. The scope baseline is an input of the scope control process

Answer: A

Question 973
You are currently on a 3-week vocation in Australia. You've decided to
rent a car as your means of transport around the country. Driving in a
foreign country can be potentially a risky activity as you are unfamiliar
with the terrain. Hence, the probability of being involved in an accident
is higher.
As a project manager, you are aware of various techniques used to
respond to understand risks. You would like to apply your risk
management knowledge to reduce the risks associated with your
driving. Which of the following is the BEST example of risk avoidance?
    A. Accept the risk associated with driving
    B. Be extra careful while driving defensively
    C. Buying auto insurance
    D. Avoid driving, use public transportation instead

Answer: D

Question 974
Qualitative risk analysis requires accurate data as its input. Risk data
quality assessment ranking is a technique to evaluate the degree to
which the data regarding risks would be useful. Risk quality data
assessment involves examining all of the following EXCEPT:
   A. Reliability and integrity of data
   B. Time-criticality of risk related actions
   C. Quality of eh data
   D. Extent of understanding of risk

Answer: B

Question 975
Which of the following statements most accurately describes the
difference between plan purchases and acquisitions and plan
contracting?
    A. Plan purchases and acquisitions involves documenting product
       requirements and identifying potential sources, while plan
       contracting involves obtaining quotation, bids, offers, and
       proposals
    B. Plan purchases and acquisitions involves producing the
       statement of work, while plan contracting involves producing the
       procurement document and evaluation criteria
    C. Plan purchases and acquisitions involves determined what to
       procure, while plan contracting involves documenting product
       requirements and identifying potential sources
    D. Plan purchases and acquisitions involves producing the
       evaluation criteria while, plan contracting involves producing the
       statement of work

Answer: B, C
Question 976
Which of the following best describes a form of progressive elaboration
planning where the work to be performed in the near time is planned
in detail at a low level of WBS, while the work far in future is planned
for WBS components that are relatively high level of the WBS?
   A. Planning components
   B. None of the choices are correct
   C. Decomposition
   D. Schedule network templates
   E. Milestones list
   F. Rolling wave planning

Answer: F

Question 977
Which of the following statements are FALSE regarding the critical
chain method?
   A. The critical chain describes longest path through a project
      schedule network after resource leveling
   B. The CCM uses, aggregate problem buffers in the project plan
      instead of individual activity/ task buffer
   C. In CCM, uncertainty is managed by padding task duration,
      starting work as early as possible, and multi-tasking
   D. CCM focuses on managing buffer activity duration in lieu of
      managing the total float of network paths
   E. CCM factors in resource availability limitations when constructing
      the project schedule

Answer: C

Question 978
You are in the process of identifying and documenting the logical
relationships among schedule activities. Which of the following are
NOT tools/ techniques you can use in this process?
   A. Schedule network templates
   B. Rolling wave planning
   C. Dependency determination
   D. PDM/ADM
   E. Applying leads and lags

Answer: B

Question 979
Which of the following statements are true regarding GERT?
  A. It is considered a conditional diagramming method
  B. It only uses finish-to-start relationships
  C. It does not support iterations and conditional branching
  D. It uses dummy activities to express logical relationships between
     activities

Answer: A

Question 980
Which of the following statements are FALSE regarding expected
monetary value analysis (EMV)?
  A. EMV is calculated by multiplying the value of each possible
     outcome by its probability of occurrence, and summing them
     together
  B. EMV is a statistical concept that calculates the average outcome
     of project outcomes based on various assumptions and scenarios
  C. EMV is a technique that computes the project cost or schedule
     over multiple iterations using random values selecting from
     distribution of possible costs or duration values
  D. Decision tree analysis is a type of EMV analysis
  E. EMV is a tool/ technique of Qualitative Risk Analysis

Answer: A

Question 981
Which of the following statements are FALSE?
  A. Funding limit aggregation is used to ensure that the expenditure
     of funds is reconciled with the funding limits imposed by the
     performing organization
  B. Cost aggregation and parametric estimation is a tool/ technique
     of cost budgeting process
  C. Analogous estimating is a form of expert judgment and is
     generally less accurate than other techniques, but is also less
     costly
  D. Parametric estimating is an estimating technique using project
     characteristics/ parameters to estimate the total project costs

Answer: A

Question 982
The risk management plan is a subset of the project management plan
and describes how risk management should be performed. All of the
following should be included in the risk management plan EXCEPT:
  A.   Stakeholders tolerance, reporting formats
  B.   Methodology, roles and responsibilities
  C.   Recommended preventive actions
  D.   P-l matrix
  E.   Budgeting, timing, risk categories

Answer: C

Question 983
You have been recently assigned to provide an accurate project
schedule for constructing a new 50-story casino in Las Vegas, Nevada.
You are evaluating the network diagram for the construction project,
and are in the process of identifying the critical path of the project.
Based on the following diagram, which path is the critical path?




  A.   A-B-E-FD-G
  B.   A-B-D-G
  C.   A-E-F-D-G
  D.   A-C-D-G
  E.   A-E-F-G

Answer: B

Question 984
You are in the process of establishing a total cost baseline for
measuring project performance. Which of the following is the LEAST
helpful tool/ technique?
   A. Parametric estimating
   B. Cost aggregation
   C. Forecasting
   D. Reserve analysis
   E. Funding limit reconciliation

Answer: C

Question 985
You are the project manager at a utility company. Due to the recent
rise in the cost of petroleum, your organization is exploring cheaper,
alternative forms of energy. You have just completed the project
Scope Planning process and created the Scope management plan.
However, upon review, you have determined that the resulting project
scope management plan is ambiguous and poorly written. A poorly
written project scope management plan will directly impact all of
the following EXCEPT:
   A. Ability to identify the necessary activities that needs to be
       performed to produce project deliverables
   B. Ability to define, prepare and integrate, all subsidiary plan, into
       the project management plan
   C. Ability to control changes to the project scope
   D. Ability to create a detailed project scope statement as the basis
       for future project decisions

Answer: B

Question 986
What is the lowest level in a WBS called?
  A. Work package
  B. Work unit
  C. Project task
  D. Work activity
  E. Work task

Answer: A

Question 987
You are using the three-point estimating technique to estimate the
duration of a schedule activity. Which of the following is the correct
formula for calculating variance assuming a triangular distribution?
  A. (pessimistic + optimistic + most likely )/3
  B. ((optimistic-pessimistic)/6)^2
  C. [(optimistic-pessimistic)^2+(most likely-pessimistic)*(most
     likely-optimistic)]/18
  D. (pessimistic +4 *(most likely)+ optimistic)/6

Answer: A

Question 988
You are in the process of identifying and documenting project risks.
Which of the following is the LEAST helpful tool/ technique?
  A. Root cause analysis
  B. Risk audits
  C. SWOT analysis
  D. Influence diagrams
  E. Cause and effect diagrams

Answer: B

Question 989
All of the following statements regarding Control Accounts are true
EXCEPT:
    A. Each Control Account contains one or more work packages and
       planning packages
    B. Each work package/ planning package may be associated with
       multiple control account
    C. Control accounts are also referred to as cost accounts
    D. A control account is a management control point for cost
       summarization, scope description, and variance analysis and
       reporting
    E. A control account is an assigned WBS level used to monitor cost
       and schedule performance of significant element of work.

Answer: B

Question 990
Which of the following is the MOST valuable result of creating the work
breakdown structure?
   A. List of risks
   B. List of activities
   C. Milestones charts
   D. Team buy-in
   E. Resource requirements
Answer: D

Question 991
You are in the process of estimating the type of and quantity of
resources needed to complete individual schedule activities. All of the
following are tools/ techniques you can use in this process EXCEPT:
    A. Parametric estimating
    B. Published estimating data, project management software
    C. Alternatives analysis
    D. Bottom-up estimating
    E. Expert judgment

Answer: A

Question 992
All of the following are constraints that can limit flexibility in human
Resource Planning EXCEPT:
    A. Compliance and safety
    B. Organizational structure
    C. Collective bargaining agreements
    D. Economic conditions

Answer: A

Question 993
You are the project manager responsible for renovating a 70-year old
building. You intend to hire an outside construction firm to seismic
retrofit the building in order to make sure that the building can
withstand the large earthquakes. You are in process of selecting a
contract type best suited for this project. You would like to select a
contract type that transfers the risk onto the seller for any cost risks
and no-performance issues. Which contract type should you choose?
   A. Fixed price contract
   B. Time and materials contracts
   C. Cost plus fixed fee contracts
   D. Cost reimbursable contracts
   E. Cost plus percentage of cost contracts

Answer: A

Question 994
You are in the process of defining the specific activities that need to be
performed to develop the necessary project deliverables. Which of the
following are NOT tools/ techniques that you can use in this process?
   A.   Bottom-up estimating
   B.   Planning component
   C.   Rolling wave planning
   D.   Expert judgment
   E.   Decomposition, templates

Answer: A

Question 995
Which of the following best describes the process of identifying which
project needs can be met by procuring products or service outside the
project organization?
   A. Plan purchases and acquisitions
   B. Request seller responses
   C. Select sellers
   D. Plan contracting

Answer: A

Question 996
You are using the three-point estimating technique to estimate the
duration of a schedule activity. You are given the following data:
Pessimistic=200days
Optimistic=100days
Most likely=120 days
Average= 130 days
Variance= 277.7
Which of the following statements are true?
  A. The calculations were performed assuming     a UNIFOREM
     distribution
  B. Not enough information is provided
  C. The calculations were performed assuming     a exponential
     distribution
  D. The calculations were performed assuming     a triangular
     distribution
  E. The calculations were performed assuming     a beta distribution

Answer: E

Question 997
All of the following are outputs of the scope definition process EXCEPT:
    A. Project scope statement
    B. Project scope management plan (updates)
    C. Preliminary project scope statement
    D. Requested changes
Answer: C

Question 998
All of the following are types of strategies that one can use to deal
with risks with upside opportunity EXCEPT:
    A. Share
    B. Avoid
    C. Accept
    D. Exploit
    E. Enhance

Answer: B

Question 999
You are the project manager responsible for developing a new hybrid
engine for a major auto manufacturer. You are in the process of
developing the project schedule and would like to access the feasibility
of your project schedule under various different conditions. Which of
the following scheduling techniques is the LEAST appropriate?
   A. Resource leveling
   B. Schedule compression
   C. Variance analysis
   D. Monte Carlo analysis
   E. Critical path method

Answer: D

Question 1000
All of the following are considered schedule network analysis
techniques EXCEPT:
    A. Critical path method
    B. Variance analysis
    C. What-if analysis
    D. Critical chain method
    E. Resource leveling

Answer: B
