During the development of the project stakeholder engagement plan, a project manager is usually dependent on the voice of the project stakeholders to obtain expert opinion. Which of the following is an important tool available to the project manager for gathering and organizing stakeholders' information?
During which of the following project processes do key stakeholders engage with the project for the first time?
Which of the following components of a project scope statement is useful in reducing scope creep?
As you create the Activity List, which technique is recommended for subdividing the project into smaller components called activities?
During the development of the project stakeholder engagement plan, the project manager is usually dependent on the expert judgment of senior stakeholders to identify and plan effective stakeholder management strategies. Which of the following stakeholders cannot guide the project manager in developing effective strategies for internal stakeholders?
The Create WBS process identifies the deliverables at the __________ level in the Work Breakdown Structure (WBS).
What is the primary risk when including reserves, or contingency allowances, in your cost estimate?
Which of the following statements most accurately describes a project scenario?
Which of the following is not an organizational process asset used during the Plan Resource Management process?
During the Manage Stakeholder Engagement process, a number of project documents might get updated. Which of the following project documents get updated the most during this process?
Few project managers collect lessons-learned information throughout the project's life. Most tackle this in the final days of the project or, worse, after the project is complete. What is the negative consequence of this approach?
After brainstorming potential project risks, what is the recommended method for prioritizing these risks and their mitigation plans?
If you are managing changes to the project's cost baseline, which process are you using?
During the Control Procurements process, a number of documents might get updated due to various reasons. Which of the following components of the project management plan is least likely to get updated during this process?
In order to facilitate project configuration and change management on complex projects, a project manager relies on configuration and change management tools. Such tools:
Various tools and techniques determine project requirements during the Collect Requirements process. These requirements form the basis for defining the project scope. One of the responsibilities of a project manager is to identify key project deliverables during this exercise. Where are the key project deliverables documented?
The most detailed level of the WBS is the _______________ .
Which of the following is a hierarchical representation of project risks?
If an investment in a project returns 15 percent annually, how much should you invest to get $5 million by the end of the fifth year?
A business is considering more than a dozen infrastructure upgrade projects. These projects, once delivered, will add to the organization's overall performance but will not contribute to any of the revenue streams. Prior to initiating any such project, the value of the project to the organization must be determined. Which of the following is the most important factor to consider in such a scenario?
If a project manager believes that a particular subcontract needs to be terminated, which of the following can provide guidance on the contract termination procedure?
Which of these types of precedence relationships is least commonly used in the Precedence Diagramming Method?
A RACI chart is an example of a _________________.
If the project's current total earned value (EV) is $100,000 and the actual amount spent (AC) is $95,000, what is the cost variance of the project?
A contractor is currently constructing a new building for your organization on a cost-plus-incentive contract. You just received the project status report from the contractor's project manager. According to the report, the project's CPI is 1.5. You are shocked because you believe the project costs are out of control. Upon investigation, you learn the $1 million advance payment (20 percent of the estimated project cost) given to the contractor at the start of the project was included in the project's earned value. Further, the cost of the inventory at the project site was excluded from the total actual costs. According to the contract, your company reimburses only the costs for the completed deliverables and not for the supplies in the project's inventory. In this scenario, the reported project's CPI is incorrect because:
Each critical project communication requirement must be carefully analyzed. One good way is to use a communication model to design effective communications. What is the sequence of steps in a basic communication model?
Recently, a junior team member has challenged the project management approach since not all requirements identified during the Collect Requirements process were documented in the project scope statement. You are the project manager, what should you do first?
Project knowledge management is concerned with managing which type of project knowledge?
Jane is currently reviewing a list of project proposals. All the proposed projects achieve some of the organizational strategic objectives and their expected costs are known. However, Jane cannot execute all the projects due to the funding limitation. How shall Jane determine which projects she needs to execute this year?
Increasing the number of resources in order to crash a project schedule does not always cut the time by the same factor. In worst cases, too many resources assigned to an activity may actually increase the activity duration. This is because:
A project manager scheduled a review at the end of a phase, with the objective of obtaining authorization to close the current project phase and initiate the next phase. Which of the following is an incorrect way of describing this review?
Which of the following tools and techniques is useful to process work performance data to identify sources of project defects during the Control Quality process?
The Requirements Traceability Matrix helps in tracing all the following except:
Which of the following should you not use as an input into creating the WBS structure?
Which of the following processes are usually performed once or at predefined points in the project:
Which term best describes the Identify Risks process?
During the Plan Risk Management process, assigning ___________ will help you and the project team identify all important risks and work more effectively during the identification process.
Which of these processes is not a Project Schedule Management process?
The technique most commonly used by project management software packages to construct a project schedule model is:
Which of the following defines the total scope of the project and represents the work specified in the current approved project scope statement?
If you are creating a new WBS for your project, what should you do to save time during the creation process?
Which of these precedence relationships is most commonly used in the Precedence Diagramming Method?
The output of the Validate Scope process is accepted deliverables that are formally signed off by the stakeholders. The stakeholders, on some projects, can get involved with the project as early as:
An effective quality audit should be:
What is the traditional way to display a reporting structure among project team members?
Kevin is assigned to a software development project that will start in the near future and is currently tailoring the PMBOK processes to satisfy the project's specific needs. Kevin wants to introduce a new process, "Identify Key Deliverables", to the existing six project scope management processes. Although he understands that project deliverables identification is already in the PMBOK scope management processes, he believes that having a dedicated process will stress the importance of determining and agreeing to key project deliverables. The best position for the new "Identify Key Deliverables" process should be between which of the following two processes?
During which stages of a project should the project manager be most active in managing project stakeholders' needs and expectations?
Project risks should be identified by:
A control chart should always contain:
When is Rolling Wave Planning useful in a project?
Which of the following is not a PMBOK Knowledge Area?
A project manager is managing a research project. Typically, research projects are not clearly defined and involve a lot of uncertainty. The project has four phases in which a phase can only start when its previous phase is complete. What project lifecycle and phase-to-phase relationship should the project manager use for this project?
The transition from one phase to another within a project's lifecycle (e.g., from design to manufacturing) is typically marked by:
The resource optimization technique during the Control Schedule process allows a project manager to:
Which of the following is an enterprise environmental factor?
Estimating the type and quantities of material, people, equipment, and supplies required to perform each activity is:
Projects operating in agile environments where a high degree of uncertainty exists and where the scope is not yet fully defined, may not benefit from detailed cost calculations due to frequent changes. Instead, lightweight estimation methods can be used to generate a fast, high-level forecast of project labor costs, which can then be easily adjusted as changes arise. Detailed estimates are:
Fill in the blank. _______________ indicates that planning and documentation are iterative or ongoing activities.
A single point of failure (SPOF) is the part of a system that, upon failure, stops the entire system from working or makes the system useless. Which of the following events can render a knowledge management system ineffective?
Which of the following is not a project competing constraint?
A good project manager always gathers and documents lessons learned throughout the project lifecycle rather than delaying the effort until the project closure. Which of the following is not a risk associated with postponing the lessons-learned gathering effort until the very end of the project?
Laurence is the PMO manager at ANZ Company. The CEO of the company asked Laurence to review the business requirements and develop the current year's capital management plan. The capital management plan will outline the key business deliverables (capital projects) and will go to the board for final approval. Which of the following organizational artifacts should Laurence review to analyze the business requirements for the current fiscal year?
Maintaining good supplier relationships should be important to all project managers. A good buyer-seller relationship is a partnership that results in a win-win situation that nurtures both parties. Which of the following is both a shortand long-term benefit of treating a supplier with courtesy, honesty, and fairness?
James is managing a shopping mall construction project. During the project execution, he learns the project communications management plan is not effective and requires a major update. Which of the following processes will issue a change request for the required update?
With a growing awareness of so-called unknowable-unknowns, the existence of emergent risk is becoming clear. These are risks that can only be recognized after they have occurred. Emergent risks can be tackled through developing:
Change control tool selection should be based on the needs of the project stakeholders, including organizational and environmental considerations and/or constraints. Which of the following is not a key change management consideration while selecting an appropriate change control tool for a project?
In general, Perform Qualitative Risk Analysis is:
As a project manager, you perform various project performance measurements to assess the magnitude of variation. You then attempt to determine the cause and decide whether corrective action is necessary. This is:
Two efficiency indicators that reflect the cost and schedule performance of a project are:
In projects with adaptive life cycles, many of the project management processes are repeated in each iteration of the project except:
If you want to compress a project schedule, what are two of the recommended alternatives to consider?
Large organizations typically manage a wide range of projects; from small projects to large initiatives requiring long-term commitments. Which of the following factors can be used in scaling such projects:
Which of the following is not a part of the data gathering tools used in Control Quality process?
Measuring the quality of items in a sample on a pass/fail basis is:
George is managing a telecommunication network deployment project. Most of the key project stakeholders are happy with the project so far. However, George has some potential concerns that might become issues in the near future. The next project status update meeting with the key stakeholders is the next day. What should George do?
On-demand scheduling is one of the techniques used in agile projects. This type of scheduling relies on:
Midway through a project, a project manager determined the project was running far behind schedule. If the project manager needs to shorten the project schedule without changing the project scope, which of the following schedule compression techniques could he use?
At the end of a project, what will your schedule variance be equal to?
How does time-boxing help minimize scope creep in agile projects?
A good project manager knows the value of effective stakeholder management. What is the ultimate goal of effective stakeholder management?
While analyzing a project, the project manager calculated the ratio of the Earned Value (EV) to the Actual Costs (AC) and obtained a value of 1.2. The project manager decided this was an unfavorable condition for the project and decided to take corrective action. What is your view?
Which of these is not an established Estimate Activity Durations technique?
If you are working on a project where there is no definite detailed scope, but there are similar projects in the past, what is the correct Estimate Activity Durations tool to use?
As project manager, you would like to show the relationship between two variables to help your project team understand the quality impact better. Which tool should you use?
A project manager feels the need of updating one of the project supplier contracts to meet the project's current needs. However, before any change requests, the project manager must know the right process to incorporate a change into this specific contract. What should he do first?
The objective of a transformation project is to move an organization from one state to another state. The desired result of the change driven by the project is described as the:
The term Progressive Elaboration incorrectly represents which of the following?
Which document describes the project's deliverables and the work required to create those deliverables?
During a presentation to management, you want to display the project schedule with only the key deliverables displayed. What is the correct tool for this purpose?
Henry is the project manager for a process improvement project. Henry is a recently hired Six Sigma expert. David is the process owner of the process Henry must optimize. During the project kick-start meeting with the project sponsor, David said he supports all continuous improvement efforts. However, David is unaware of the Six Sigma technique and feels threatened by the newly hired expert, and as a result, is blocking Henry's ideas. What is David's current engagement level with the project?
Which of these items are important to address when determining each person's role in the project team?
If you want to reduce the number of quality inspections and reduce the cost of quality control for your project, which technique should you use?
Performance reports are produced during the Control Procurements process by evaluating work performance data against the agreement requirements. Which of the following is the prime objective of producing such reports?
Project managers need to be aware of Student Syndrome. What does that mean?
A project manager must stress the importance of collecting and documenting lessons learned through the project lifecycle. One good way to collect this information is during weekly status meetings. Usually, weekly status meetings, if not managed properly, end up in firefighting since most of the time, attention goes to the burning issues. How can you ensure that the lessons-learned gathering does not get missed in such a situation?
Where would you find a detailed list and description of specific project assumptions associated with the project?
A number of teams are developing an enterprise system using the agile approach for product development. Which of the following is a major risk item for such a complex project being performed in an agile environment?
Which of these is not a data analysis technique used during quantitative risk analysis?
Which of the following is a tool or technique of the Develop Team process?
A hierarchical structure of project resources organized by category and resource type, used in planning, managing and controlling project work, is:
A project post-mortem is an activity, usually performed at the project's conclusion, to determine and analyze a project's outcome which also includes a lessons-learned gathering exercise. Project post-mortems help to mitigate future risks and are often a key component of, and ongoing precursor to, effective risk management. Which of the following is a terrible mistake when collecting lessons learned?
What does a Cost Performance Index (CPI) of more than 1.0 indicate?
Which of the following statements is correct?
A project team member finds that the color scheme of the webpage he is designing appears too gaudy and decides to change it to a melloweddown color scheme. The customer approved the original color scheme and the color palette. The independent testing team flags this as a defect, and a heated discussion ensues between the team member and the testing team. What is your view?
Which of the following items needs to be kept in mind when relying on risk identification checklists?
As an external vendor, you are managing a complex software project on a time-and-materials (T&M) contract. One of your team members reports a breakthrough in automating some of the testing activities. This may result in cost savings to the project and completion of the project one month ahead of schedule. Which of the following actions would you take?
A company manages SBG contracting bids for government tenders and all successful bids as a separate project. The structure of the company is mainly projectized for a dedicated project team to manage each project. However, to realize economies of scale, there are some central departments that serve all projects. Which of the following role is most likely to be working in a central department instead of directly working with a project team?
The Control Procurements process receives a very important input from the Direct and Manage Project Work process. Which one is it?
Julia is currently recruiting her project team. She has carried out various interviews and has shortlisted potential candidates. Now, according to the project communication management plan, she has to submit the shortlisted profiles to the project client (customer) for approval. Only then, can she formally hire the approved candidates for the project. The submission of the profiles to the client will go through which of the following processes?
Mark is in the middle of a software development project. So far, the project has incurred a total cost of $50,000. If it is determined the project is no longer required, what would we call the cost incurred to date?
Upon obtaining the project charter, the Project Manager of a project starts acquiring the project team immediately. Is this correct?
What is a recommended method for controlling change within a project?
A project manager calls you in as a consultant to provide input on developing the Project Charter. According to the PMBOK, your contribution to the project could best be termed as:
Which process is concerned with providing forecasts to update current cost information?
Which of the following would not be considered an Enterprise Environmental Factor during the Develop Project Charter process?
The Close Project or Phase process is not performed when:
Which of these tools and techniques is common to all seven Project Integration Management processes?
You are beginning a new project. When should you use the Perform Integrated Change Control process?
The project management team has determined that there are some changes to the scope of the project. According to the PMBOK, who is responsible for reviewing, evaluating, and approving documented changes to the project?
What is the difference between the Monitor and Control Project Work process and the Direct and Manage Project Work process?
You are a consulting project manager and an investment bank has a contract with you to run a large information technology project that is expected to last 15 months. During the Direct and Manage Project Work process, you discover that several regulatory requirements were addressed in the project management plan but missed from the scope statement. Failure to meet these requirements could result in legal action against the company. However, implementing the technology to comply with these regulations could exceed the budget and scope of the project and result in the cancellation of the project. What should you do?
An organization's value chain can be represented by a special type of flowchart called SIPOC. SIPOC stands for:
Julia is managing a water treatment plant construction project. A new government has recently been sworn in. During the election campaign, the winning candidate made a number of commitments regarding environmental control reforms. Julia is not sure how the new government and its future policies might affect her project. This is an example of:
As a project manager, you are responsible for determining and delivering the required levels of both grade and quality. Select which of the following statements you disagree with.
Which of the following processes produces a work breakdown structure as an output?
How can a project manager ensure continued active support of the project supporters and at the same time minimize negative impacts from the negative stakeholders?
Most project management software packages use a method of constructing a project schedule network diagram known as:
The fundamental lesson from the Theory of Constraints by Goldratt is:
Martin is the project manager of a project that is in an early phase. He needs to estimate costs but finds that he has a limited amount of detailed information about the project. Which of the following estimation techniques is least suited to his requirements?
The performance reports produced during the Control Procurements process are then provided to which project management process for further processing?
To develop a project stakeholder engagement plan, seek knowledge from groups or individuals with specialized training or subject matter insight into the relationships within the organization. In PMBOK jargon, what is this technique called?
Three years back, your organization awarded a fixed price contract to a reputable local contractor to construct a new airport terminal in the city. A few days back, you received a change request from the contractor requesting to adjust the contract's price. The contractor is claiming that as a result of the recent national recession, the prices of raw materials have gone up and he cannot complete the rest of the project at the contract price. Is the contactor's request legitimate?
Which of the following is an agile prototyping technique showing sequence or navigation through a series of images or illustrations:
Which of the following statements is correct:
Unless an enterprise-wide ERP is deployed in an organization, disparate IT systems perform specialized tasks in a project. Which of the following systems typically processes supplier's payments after obtaining all the necessary certification of satisfactory work?
It is extremely important for a project manager to determine and map key stakeholder engagement levels early in the project. Which of the following statements support this claim:
A management control point where scope, budget and schedule are integrated and compared to earned value for performance measurement is a:
Which of the following is an example of a chart, used on agile projects, that tracks the work that remains to be completed in the iteration backlog?
Which of the following best describes the Validate Scope process?
As a project manager, you are analyzing the costs incurred in a project. Which of the following costs cannot be classified under cost of nonconformance?
Which of the following approaches can assist in managing ambiguity risks?
A project manager estimates the work to be accomplished in the near term in detail at a low level of the Work Breakdown Structure (WBS). He estimates work far in the future as WBS components that are at a relatively high level of the WBS. What is this technique called?
Negative risks can either be ______, transferred, or mitigated as a countermeasure.
The WBS represents all product and project work. The total work at the lowest levels should roll up to the higher levels so that nothing is left out and no extra work is performed. This principle is also the:
A technical team can begin to edit a large document 15 days after it begins writing it. What kind of dependency would this represent?
How does the role of a project manager change based on managing projects using a predictive development life cycle then managing projects in adaptive environments?
The business case documents the business need and the cost benefit analysis that justify the project. The summary of how the project has achieved the business needs identified in the business case is document in the:
Configuration management tool selection should be based on the needs of the project stakeholders including organizational and environmental considerations and/or constraints. Which of the following is not a key configuration management consideration while selecting an appropriate configuration management tool for a project?
Nancy is carrying out cost-benefit analysis for a project. If undertaken, the project will start in January next year and end by December. The project will incur a constant cost of $10,000 each month (payable by the end of each month) giving a total cost of $120,000 for the project. The revenue from the project is collected on a quarterly basis. The total revenue for the project by the end of December will be $200,000. The opportunity cost of the project is 12 percent which is the bank interest rate Nancy can get if she does not invest in this project. The total present value of all cash outflows is $112,551, while the total present value of all cash inflow is $185,721. What is the benefit-to-cost ratio for the project?
A Resource Breakdown Structure (RBS) breaks down the project by type of resources. The RBS is an example of a:
It is not practical, and usually not necessary, to engage with all stakeholders with the same level of intensity at all times. A project manager must prioritize stakeholders depending upon on who they are, what level of influence they have on the project, and what their interests are. Which of the following techniques helps in stakeholder prioritization?
Lucy is managing a high-tech software development project. She has luckily acquired the organization's best performing employees. However, the project team is not communicating effectively, causing delays. The project communications plan is in place, but it seems as if the employees are not following it. The communications plan lays out the communications requirements but does not explicitly assign responsibilities. What should Lucy do first? (Assume that all the following actions need to be taken at some stage.)
Analogous Estimating is an estimation technique that uses the values of parameters such as scope, cost, budget, and duration from a previous similar activity as the basis of activity. It is frequently used for estimation when there is a limited amount of information about the project. This is a form of:
Which of the following approaches encourages plan definition but also acknowledges that once work starts, the priorities may change and the plan needs to be updated to reflect this change?
Once the project charter is authorized, it is the project manager's duty to distribute the charter to all key stakeholders and ensure common understanding of the key deliverables, milestones, and their roles and responsibilities. During which of the following processes is the project charter distributed to the project stakeholders?
Adam has just taken over a construction project. The project is currently in the planning phase of the project lifecycle. Adam's next deliverable is to produce an effective stakeholder engagement strategy. Which of the following is the most important component of an effective stakeholder engagement plan?
The banks in the Ukraine have raised the annual interest rates sharply to 30 percent. You have the option to invest your money either in Ukrainian banks or to build a small factory for a client. The total cost of building the factory will be $12 million but it will spread evenly over one year ($1 million payable by the end of each month for the next 12 months). The client will make a payment of $3.9 million at the end of each quarter from the start of the project. Which of the following is the best option (if you are only considering the return on investment)?
Which of the following are short, textual descriptions of required functionality often developed during a requirements gathering workshop:
Which of the following is an example of rolling wave planning in a project following an adaptive life cycle?
A project manager first creates an assumption log during the Develop Project Charter process and records all project assumptions and constraints. During which of the following processes is the assumptions log updated and/or new assumptions and constraints added during the project execution?
A project was estimated to cost $200,000 with a timeline of 10 months. Due to a shipment delay, the schedule was slightly delayed. However, this was made up by shipping the first batch of materials for the project by air. The net result was that there was some additional cost in the project. At the end of the second month, the Project Manager reviews the project and finds that the project is 20% complete and Actual Costs are $50,000. The Estimate to Complete (ETC) for the project would now be:
You have a team of engineers working on your project. Two of the engineers have frequent disagreements. You ask them to resolve their differences through a discussion. However, that does not yield any results. Subsequently, you intervene, and based on your analysis of the situation, you suggest some changes in the way they work with each other. This still does not yield results, and you find that the project schedule is beginning to suffer. What is your next course of action?
Nate is the project manager for a research and development project. According to the project communication management plan, Nate has to call in weekly project progress update meetings. The last few meetings were a disaster since more time was spent in arguments and less on decisions. Which of the following techniques does Nate need to quickly acquire?
While developing the project schedule, you find that the completion of a successor activity depends on the completion of its predecessor activity. What is this dependency called?
Which of the following is not a tool and technique of the Collect Requirements process?
One key characteristic of adaptive lifecycles, such as the agile approach for product development, is that product features are developed using:
A project manager wishes to illustrate the connections between the work that needs to be done and the project team members. According to the PMBOK, the resulting document is a:
Many project managers have seen a graph that shows "Influence of Stakeholders" starting out high and declining as the project progresses. In contrast, it also shows the "Cost of Changes" starting out low and increasing as the project progresses. What is the key insight a project manager should gain from this graph?
Which of the following techniques can help a project manager review a supplier's internal work processes to ensure compliance to standards during the production of the deliverables? (Assume that all of the given choices are available to the project manager.)
The best practice to gather and document lessons learned is during weekly progress meetings. The agenda can have a lessons-learned brainstorming item at the end of these meetings. You can ask team members to put forward their recommendations, but it is always better to adopt a more structured way to gather lessons learned. Which of the following approaches will ensure you capture important lessons learned on your project?
Work Performance Data is an important input to the Control Procurements process. Which of the following is not a component of Work Performance Data?
George is managing a construction project and currently sequencing the project activities and defining their logical relationships. Two activities have both the SS and FF relationships. How should George schedule these activities?
As part of tracking a project, a project manager is validating the completion of project scope. He or she would measure this against:
Which of the following processes is not a part of the Project Scope Management?
Establishing control accounts for the work packages and a unique identifier from a code of accounts finalizes the WBS. This provides a structure for hierarchical summation of:
Uncontrolled project scope changes are often referred to as ________ .
While managing a project, you have included the product acceptance criteria in the Quality Management Plan. While reviewing your plan, a senior manager asks you to reconsider this. You then realize that what you did is incorrect. Where should you place the product acceptance criteria?
The Project Scope Management Knowledge Area is primarily concerned with:
A project manager approaches you to understand the Work Breakdown Structure (WBS) in better detail. You tell her that:
Why must the Validate Scope process be completed in a project?
A project manager wants to use a group decision-making technique to generate, classify and prioritize requirements. Which of these is not a valid group decision-making technique?
Adaptive project lifecycles, in comparison with predictive project lifecycles, are developed with the intent of:
You are building a dam for a state government. Your organization is considered a specialist in dam design and overall management of construction activities. However, your organization lacks resources to execute the earth-works involved. You have subcontracted all the project's earth-works to a local subcontractor. The quality of the subcontractor's work is acceptable, but the subcontractor is not conforming to your organization's health and safety standards. You escalated this to the subcontractor's project manager, but he turned down your request. The subcontractor's project manager is of the view that the request is out of the contract's scope and none of the contract provisions require him to conform to your organization's standards. You are agitated since you believe health and safety standards are globally accepted, and the contract does not have to explicitly state them. Further, according to the state law, you cannot terminate the contract since the subcontractor has not vio
Which of the following is an output of the Define Activities process?
A control chart is used to determine whether a process is stable or has predictable performance. When a process is within acceptable limits, the process does not need adjustment. How are these upper and lower control limits determined?
Julia is currently assessing her project stakeholders' engagement levels. During this exercise, she finds she also needs to document an escalation process, which will come in handy in the future. Where does she need to document the project's escalation process?
As part of a new project you just started on as project manager, you are assembling your team and discovering that one of the critical pieces of work requires a specialist from one of the functional departments. However, you are aware the functional manager may be reluctant to assign that resource to your project since your project is not a high-profile one. Which of the following techniques will you need to apply?
The Cost Management Plan is an output of the Plan Cost Management process. This plan is then integrated with other project plans in which of these processes?
You are building a mile-long bridge on a T&M contract. During the excavation activity, you learned some telephone cables are crossing the alignment where you have to construct the bridge. You need to relocate these telephone cables, but there is no provision of such an activity in the contract. Further, the relocation of the cables is a costly task, and you need to do a lot of government paperwork, as well. You requested an amendment in the contract, but the buyer rejected it. Despite many efforts, you both could not resolve this issue. What should you do next?
The Plan-Do-Check-Act (PDCA) cycle as the basis for quality improvement is usually attributed to:
In regards to WBS, which of the following is the correct way to decompose the project scope?
A ______ is a collection of projects or programs grouped together for strategic business needs.
In a Finish-to-Start relationship between predecessor and successor activities, a project manager decides to schedule a successor activity five days before its predecessor is complete. This is accomplished by providing five days of:
You are carrying out a project for an external customer. Most of the project's scope of work is outsourced and distributed among many subcontractors. What would be the role of the Direct and Manage Project Work process in this scenario?
Which of the following inaccurately describes a prototype?
Key project stakeholders can significantly influence a project in many ways. During which stage of the project do these stakeholders have the maximum ability to influence a project?
Mary has just assigned Thomas as project manager of an upcoming railway construction project. She hands an approved project charter to Thomas. Once Thomas thoroughly reviews the project charter, what should he do next?
Which of these is not a data gathering technique used in the Identify Risks process?
The organization's strategy provides a strategic direction and performance parameters for identifying, selecting, and delivering the right mix of projects. If it is determined that some of the CEO's favorite projects do not fully align with the business objective, the PMO manager must:
Which of the following is not a tool or technique of the Acquire Resources process?
All requested changes to a contract go through Contract Change Control Systems of both parties. The Contract Change Control system documents all requested changes for future reference. However, requested but unresolved changes might not make it up to either party's Change Control Systems. If you are contesting a dispute, where can you find a record of such requested changes?
While the five process groups are usually completed in order, they often overlap with each other throughout the project. Which two process groups usually do not overlap during the course of the project?
Which of the following is the correct logical sequence of the five process groups?
You are currently managing an urban development project for a municipal authority. You and your team are managing the project and have outsourced most of the project work to specialist contractors. All the contracts awarded were FFP contracts. The project is almost 50 percent complete, and most of the contractors have requested amendments to their contacts. Work specifications were not clear at the time of contract awards, and as a result, new work requirements have come up. What is your lesson learned?
You have met with your project sponsor who told you that you must complete the project by the end of the year, no exceptions. This should be included in the project scope statement as a:
Along with the project communications management plan, work performance reports are vital inputs to the Manage Communications process. Where do these work performance reports come from?
On-demand scheduling is one of the techniques used in agile environments. This type of scheduling ______ work from a backlog as resources become available.
Lee is the project manager of a project, and he is planning responses to a set of risks. As a direct result of implementing these risk responses, he anticipates certain other risks to arise. These are:
Linda is currently drafting her project stakeholder management plan. Since she is a new hire, she is not aware of the company's policies and procedures. If she wants to know more about the company's general issues management procedures, where must she look?
A tool that provides a visual representation of human resource allocation to a project, number of working hours, and availability on the project is a:
In projects following adaptive lifecycles, what are the two critical components of iterative scheduling with a product backlog?
Three strategies that typically deal with negative risks or threats are:
Which of the following is least likely to be a project?
Which of the Project Schedule Management processes involves identifying and documenting dependencies among schedule activities?
What does it mean if the Earned Value is equal to Actual Cost?
Although it is highly recommended that lessons learned are captured and documented throughout the project lifecycle, lessons learned are finalized during project closure. At this stage, responses to high-level questions may be gathered and documented. Which of the following is not an appropriate question to ask at this stage?
Robert is managing a construction project. The project's client is responsible for the design, while Robert's organization is responsible for the construction. There has been a 45-day delay on a couple of major structure designs. This delay can only be recovered through crashing and will cost $2 million in addition to the approved budget. Robert prepares a detailed report and emails it to the client. In this scenario, Robert's email to the client is an example of:
You are the project manager managing a project to design a print head for dot matrix printers. In order to determine ideal settings for print quality, the quality manager of the company suggests trying out various scenarios for printing by varying certain parameters on the print head. Identifying such variables which influence the product or process under development is called:
Although the business value is unique to each organization, each organization strives to attain business value for its activities. Which of the following does NOT create value for an organization?
You are managing a complex submarine causeway construction project. When you started the project, the scope of work was not clear and was based on a rather high-level estimate. Now that you are in the middle of the project, more information has become available. As a result, you now need to change some of the key subcontracts on the project. Which of the following will guide you through the change process?
Cause-and-Effect diagrams are used to illustrate how various factors might link to potential problems or effects. They are also called:
The purpose of lessons learned is to bring together any insights gained during a project that can be usefully applied on future projects. When should a project manager ideally commence this activity?
Which of the following analytical techniques evaluates investment potential considering time-value of money?
Which of the following is not true about the WBS?
Which of the following is accurate regarding the Estimate Activity Resources process?
In a project, Activity A has a duration of four days and begins on the morning of Monday the fourth. The successor Activity, B, has a Finishto-Start (FS) relationship with
Analogous Cost Estimating is which of the following?
What is the best way to make an accurate forecast of ETC?
Which of the following is not a valid instance of risk transference?
Under which of the following scenarios would you not use a decision tree?
You have been assigned as a project manager of a new project to be executed out of New York. However, you determine the project requires a Global Positioning Systems expert who is not available within the company in New York. After doing a little checking, you determine that the company has an expert based in London who is suitable for the project. However, the London-based employee is not willing to relocate to New York for the project. In such a case:
While planning the schedule for your project, you frequently refer to the project calendar. The project calendar is:
As a project manager, you are in the process of preparing the project schedule for the project. Which of the following accurately depicts the sequence of your activities before you began to prepare the project schedule?
After one year of construction, an office building is scheduled for completion on 30 January. The landscaping work needs to start 15 days prior to the building's completion. Which of the following relationships most likely represents the relationship of the start of landscaping work to the completion of the office building?
You are the project manager of a project. As part of the planning process, you use a planning technique to subdivide the project scope and deliverables into smaller, more manageable components. What is this technique called?
The accuracy of Activity Duration estimates can be improved by considering the amount of risk in the original estimate. The three types of estimates on which three-point estimates are based are:
You have decided to apply Resource Leveling to a project because of a critically required resource being available only at certain times. Which of the following will likely be true?
For projects where a business analyst collaborates with the project managers in managing the project scope, which of the following task is most likely to be performed by the business analyst?
A technique that iterates the project schedule many times to calculate a distribution of possible project completion dates is:
The critical path method (CPM) calculates the theoretical early start and finish dates and late start and finish dates. The difference between the late and early start of a task is a:
You are managing a project that involves work on a film shoot. The editing activity can happen only after the film is shot. The best description of the logical relationship between the editing and shooting of the film is:
Andy has just become the project manager of a multi-million-dollar construction project. Andy also has an approved project charter that authorizes him to apply organizational resources to the project. Now, Andy wants to take all key stakeholders onboard with the project charter. Where can Andy find a preliminary list of all key stakeholders?
When writing the roles and responsibilities for team members, you should document the role, authority, responsibility, and competency for each team member. Where must you document this information?
A project's financial management reserves are determined in which process:
Which of these is not a component of the scope baseline that is contained in the project management plan?
The agile technique of on-demand scheduling is not suitable when:
Project stakeholders are individuals and organizations who are actively involved in the project or who have an interest in it. Which of the following is not an internal stakeholder?
Caitlin's project is behind schedule. She is planning to crash the project by allowing overtime to the project team. This approach can bring additional risks to the project. Which of the following is not a valid risk in this scenario:
Sandra is managing a complex ERP design and implementation project. The project team has recently been hired. It is an enterprise-wide project affecting many stakeholders. It is very important for each team member to properly understand and follow the project communication requirements in order to keep the stakeholders engaged and informed. Which of the following tools and techniques can Sandra use to ensure that team members properly understand the project's communications requirements?
You are managing a construction project. Your company does not specialize in construction design so you outsourced the construction design to a third party. You are conducting regular procurement performance reviews and are dissatisfied. You want to carry out a detailed audit of the design supplier's work processes to determine the root cause. Can you do that?
Mary is currently drafting a stakeholder engagement plan for her new website development project. Her organization has strict communication guidelines. Mary wants to ensure that her stakeholder engagement strategy aligns with the organizational communications guidelines. Where can she find these guidelines?
As an experienced PMP, you have found that running a WBS meeting is tricky because you need to find a balance between insufficient decomposition and excessive decomposition. When items are excessively decomposed, it leads to all the following except:
Which of the following can NOT be used to measure business value?
John, a project manager for Code Crashers, Inc., has a project with a group of inexperienced programmers that will develop a software package that creates Material Safety Data Sheets (MSDS) for a chemical company. This situation strongly resembles a project his colleague, Peter, worked on in 2006. If John needs to come up with a rough order of magnitude estimate, what tool or technique should he use?
Andy is currently working for ABC Contractors as a quality control manager for a railway track construction project. National Railways awarded this cost-plus construction contract to ABC Contractors a few months ago. As a contractual requirement, ABC Contractors has to submit each completed deliverable for client acceptance. Reviewing project data, Andy found that the current submission rejection rate is 22 percent. He conducts a root cause analysis and submits his findings along with construction process improvement recommendations to the project director. In this scenario, Andy's report is an example of:
Nancy has recently become the project manager for a project already in execution. Nancy has learned the previous project manager did a good job so far and religiously followed the PMBOK guiding principles. However, some of the project communications don't make sense to her. Which of the project artifacts should Nancy refer to in order to determine reasons for distribution of some reports?
Which of the following is NOT a knowledge management tools and technique?
Which of the following statements correctly define the 100 percent rule for WBS?
As part of your resource management plan, you have created a chart indicating the number of hours (Y-axis) that a senior programmer will be working over the months (X-axis) of the project. This is an example of a:
Which of the following is NOT a valid project schedule presentation format:
Which of the following is a set of technical guidelines that may be applied during the design of a product for the optimization of a specific aspect of the design?
You are managing a railway track construction project. The construction contract awarded to your company is fixed price and is based on some pre-determined quantities of work to be executed. During the project execution you find out that the actual quantities of work that need to be executed are 20% greater than what has been stated in the contract. What should you do?
Some project managers take communication lightly while managing a project. However, a good project manager must take communication very seriously and must be an effective and efficient communicator. Which of the following is not a fundamental attribute of effective communication?
Who is primarily responsible for the dissemination of the approved project charter and for ensuring that all key stakeholders have a common understanding of the project's key deliverables and milestones?
You manage the construction of a new airport in your home country. Since your organization does not have experience deploying the sophisticated air-traffic control system, you outsourced this to a specialist organization. PMBOK's Procurement Management knowledge will help you successfully administer this deal; however, for the supplier of the system, all the PMBOK processes will apply since this will be a complete project for the supplying organization. Which of the following will be a common denominator between your project and the supplier projects?
At which stage in a project should the project manager begin to develop effective stakeholder engagement strategies throughout the project lifecycle?
An organization wishes to ensure that the opportunity arising from a risk with positive impact is realized. This organization should:
Your vice president asked you what the Estimate at Completion (EAC) will be for a small project you are working on. You were given a budget of $30,000, and to date you have spent $20,000 but only completed $10,000 worth of work. You are sure the future work will be accomplished at the planned rate. What is the EAC?
You just sat through an exhausting change control meeting discussing a change in scope to the project you have worked on for the past seven months. After lengthy discussion, the change in scope was approved. As the Project Manager, you should now update all the following documentation, except:
You work at a software company that authors Material Safety Data Sheets (MSDS) for chemical companies. Prior to releasing the MSDS to the company, you have created a list of items for review to ensure they appear in the document. These items include chemical name, CAS#, protection required, what to do in an emergency, etc. This list is an example of what type of tool?
Agile release planning provides a high-level summary timeline of the release schedule based on the project roadmap. Agile release planning also determines the number of iterations required for the product development. These iterations are also known as:
You manage an airport construction project. Since sophisticated technology and systems are involved, your project procurements require significant lead times. Your procurement specialist has recently proposed a new procurements management process that will significantly reduce these lead times and result in cost savings for the project. Besides implementing this new process, what else should you do?
Sandra is managing an ERP system deployment project. Due to the complexity of the project and the number of project stakeholders involved, she decides to use a multi-criteria decision analysis for reviewing all change requests. What should be her first step in establishing this?
Which of the following processes produces a Risk Register?
The Risk Register contains details of all identified risks and their current status. It is a document containing the results of:
Ben is the project manager for a mobile application development project. Due to a recent technological development, a significant change in the product design is required. This change would require a 25 percent increase in the project budget. Ben prepares a detailed report and emails it to the project sponsor, and the sponsor acknowledges the receipt of the report. What should Ben do next?
You are the project manager responsible for building a 100,000-squarefoot data center. One of the scheduled activities in your plan is to install the Computer Room Air Conditioning (CRAC) units. However, before beginning the installation of the units, a raised floor must be installed for the units to bolt to. This is an example of what type of dependency?
Robert wants to assign a risk owner for every project risk for which a risk response action is planned. Where must he update this information?
You are analyzing the risk in a project. You decide to do a sensitivity analysis to determine which risks have the most potential impact on the project. You consider using a tool to help compare the relative importance of variables that have a high degree of uncertainty with those variables that are more stable. One such tool is:
Which of these is accurate regarding the Develop Schedule process?
You are working as the project manager on a mega-construction project. You need to prepare a quarterly report for the project investors. You need to collect work performance data and convert that into work performance information. Which of the following processes produces work performance data?
When a project is executed under contract, the contractual provisions will generally be considered as _____________ for the project.
You are the project manager responsible for building a 100,000-squarefoot data center. One of the scheduled activities in your plan is to install the Computer Room Air Conditioning (CRAC) units. However, a raised floor must be installed in the data center before installation of the units can begin. This is an example of what type of precedence relationship?
The Manage Team process is part of what process group?
You have a project in which you are responsible for building a condo complex in a resort town. The project is expected to take two years to complete. During your work breakdown structure meeting, you have decomposed many deliverables into work packages and schedule activities. However, there are some work packages that will occur a year from now, so you have elected not to decompose those deliverables and work packages at this time. This is an example of what tool or technique?
Lucy has recently been assigned as the project manager for a new shopping mall construction project. Since the project will span well over five years, Lucy is a bit hesitant to use the current market rates for estimating construction materials cost. The prices have been steadily increasing and the current market rates might not remain valid in the future. Which of the following techniques can Lucy apply to determine her project budget?
You are attempting to estimate the resources required to assemble the server racks in the new data center you are building. It has occurred to you that you may be able to compress the schedule if you use power tools instead of hand tools to build the racks and if you employ individuals who have worked on this brand of rack in the past. According to PMBOK, considering multiple options for estimating is an example of what type of resource estimating technique?
You have just received an invoice from your supplier that contains some uncertified items. Payments to the supplier are processed through your corporate accounts payable system only after certification of satisfactory work by the project quality control specialist. What should you do?
You have recently joined an organization as the procurements manager. You have just received an invoice from a contractor. Some of the items from the invoice are as follows: EV of work completed to date: $50,000. AC of work completed to date: $40,000. Total costs reimbursed by the buyer to date: $35,000. If the contract between the buyer and the contractor is a CPIF contract, what is the total value payable to this contractor? (Assume that the contract allows for a 10 percent fee over net payable whenever CPI > 1).
Kate has been asked to conduct the feasibility of a new CRM system. So far, the business has been relying on its traditional manual customer relationship management processes, but now it is struggling to keep up with the competition. In this scenario, the business' requirement of acquiring a state-of-the-art CRM system to boost its customer relations management capabilities is an example of:
During a work breakdown structure meeting, you have decomposed the deliverables into work packages and created your WBS dictionary. However, you now want to decompose the work packages to assist you in estimating, executing, and controlling the project. These decomposed work packages are:
Which of the following graphical techniques visually depict the product scope by showing a business system and how other systems interact with it?
You have recently become the project manager for a construction project. You are a new hire in your company and are unaware of the organizational project management standards. Which of the following can help you get a head start on your project?
Which of the following statements is not accurate about the initial phase of a project?
Chris is managing a construction project. The project team is currently developing the "as built" construction drawings to be supplied to the client as required by the contract. Which of the following phases is Chris' project most likely in?
In predictive projects, the scope baseline for the project is used to analyze a project's scope performance. On the other hand, projects with adaptive lifecycles use:
Which process group corresponds to the "do" part of the plan-do-check-act cycle?
You have recently taken over a project as the project manager. The project is midway through execution, and most of the project work has been subcontracted. You have just found out that one of the subcontractors, who was responsible for all demolitions, has been paid 50 percent of the subcontracted value, but he has delivered only 25 percent of the required works. Upon investigation, you learned that all the payments are in line with the signed contract between the two parties and the subcontractor's work is compliant with the contract specifications. You are annoyed because this does not give you enough control over the subcontracted works. Which of the following is not an appropriate thing to do at this stage?
Your company is considering buying a building worth $1 million. If the company buys this building and rents it out for the next five years, it will get $100,000 per year as rent (receivable by the end of each year). At the end of the fifth year, the company will resell the building at $1.1 million. What is the NPV of this investment at 10 percent per annum discount rate?
Andrew is a project management guru hired by a retail giant in your country. Andrew finds out there is a wide array of projects that need to be managed from a central PMO; from a number of small projects to large initiatives requiring long-term roadmaps to manage the development of these programs. What project management approach should be recommended for such projects?
Organizational process assets are fundamental inputs to most of the project management processes. However, only some of the process assets are relevant to any given process. Which of the following organizational process assets is the least important consideration during the Manage Stakeholder Engagement process?
The paint on the exotic cars that are manufactured in your plant is bubbling about a year after application. What would be the best tool for your team to use to find potential causes of the peeling paint?
Early in the project, you are meeting with your team and would like to address all the strengths, weaknesses, opportunities, and threats the project is facing. What tool should be used?
You recently took over a project as the project manager. This is your first project management assignment. The project sponsor is very supportive and is helping you out in successfully managing the project. Recently, some bad quality deliverables were received on the project, and the project sponsor suggested that you to periodically review the vendor's progress to deliver project scope and quality, within cost and on schedule, as compared to the contract. Which of the following statements is true in this context?
You are in charge of constructing the Ferris wheel in each town a carnival visits. However, this is something you have never done before, and you are getting different opinions from others on how long it takes. Joe is new and has given you what you believe to be an optimistic estimate of three hours; Bill says it will take 10 hours, which seems too long to you and quite pessimistic. Last, Margie, who is the most experienced at this task, is telling you it will take eight hours. You are not sure whom to believe, so you decide to do three-point estimation (based on beta distribution). Based on this, how many hours will it take you to assemble the Ferris wheel?
PMBOK offers a number of tools and techniques for all the project management processes. These tools and techniques must be carefully applied in order to meet the objectives of any process. Which of the following is not a tool or technique of the Plan Stakeholder Engagement process?
Business value is also defined as the aggregate of all tangible and intangible elements of the business. Which of the following is NOT an example of a tangible business element?
You have just returned from the weekly change control board meeting at which you presented the requested changes to the employee move project. You had five change requests approved and one request rejected. These are outputs of what process?
There are two activities on your schedule: 1) Install server in lab, and 2) Move server into the data center. However, the second task cannot start until the server has run in the lab for five days without failure. This is an example of what?
Your construction project is in execution, and you require a major change to one of your supplier agreements. Can you directly make this change with mutual consent of the supplier during the Control Procurements process, or do you have to visit the Perform Integrated Change Control process, as well?
A change log is an important input to the Manage Stakeholder Engagement process. Which process provides this input?
In your weekly status reports, you report the earned value for the project. This information is essential for you and the stakeholders to gauge the progress of the project. What process group is the cost and schedule control part of?
You are having your project team members record the time they spend on different activities during the day, such as programming, electrical, HVAC, etc. This is an example of a tool and technique in what process?
You are working with your team and are looking at the cost risks in the project. You and your team are currently creating a tornado diagram for the project risks. You do this as a part of which of the following processes?
Stakeholder notifications must be archived for future reference. Whenever the Manage Communications process produces a stakeholder notification, the notification must be:
Communication noise refers to influences on effective communication that influence the interpretation of conversations. Noise affects which components of communication?
You are in the execution stage of your project, and you are informed that "corporate" will send in a team of consultants to review whether your project activities comply with your company's and PMI's policies, standards, and procedures. This is an example of:
You are in the initiation phase of your project, and you believe the project can be completed for $100,000. However, you are an experienced project manager and know that many things can happen between the initiation phase and the closure of the project. In the project charter, you have provided an estimate of $75,000 to $175,000. This is an example of:
PMBOK recognizes five process groups typical of nearly all projects. Which of the following is not one of them?
A technique that calculates multiple project durations with different sets of activity assumptions and variables is:
Project stakeholder management is an integral part of project management. The effectiveness of stakeholder analysis carried out early in a project can decide its fate. Which of the following is the least important consideration during stakeholder analysis, especially when analyzing stakeholders who are also decision-makers?
A process that states how formal validation and acceptance of the completed project deliverables will be achieved is documented in the:
The WBS is a deliverable-oriented hierarchical decomposition of the work the project team must execute to accomplish the project objectives. This is created as part of:
Which of the following Manage Quality techniques examines problems, constraints, and non-value-added activities that occur during project work?
On any project, the configuration control should be focused on the specification of:
Complex projects usually demand preparation and distribution of periodic project performance reports. The contents of performance reports are usually determined early and documented in the project communications management plan. Which of the following is least likely to be a section on a work performance report?
Andy's project stakeholders are not happy as the project is lagging behind schedule. During the executive committee meeting, Andy requests all stakeholders to keep their calm as most of the project deliverables have been completed and only quality inspections of these deliverables is pending. He assures the stakeholders that he is planning to crash the project to meet the completion deadline. What should be the stakeholders' biggest concern now?
A change request that is issued to bring the performance of the project back in line with the project management plan is related to:
Which of the following tools give a visual representation of an organization's data, described in business language that is independent of any specific technology?
You are running one week behind on a project due to a late delivery by a vendor. You are forced to compress your project schedule due to a government-mandated end date that constrains your project. After meeting with your team, the decision is to work several tasks in parallel that were scheduled to be run consecutively. This is an example of:
While developing your project schedule, you have asked everyone to provide a list of planned vacations over the next three months, and you have applied this information to the tasks that each person is responsible for. What also needs updating?
A project has gone out of control, and the project manager is trying to bring it back under control. There have been a number of changes to the project scope. Some of these changes resulted in further changes, causing project cost to spiral upward and causing the project to go out of schedule. This is known as:
Mary is managing an organizational transformation project. The nature of the project would require responding to high levels of change and would also require continuous stakeholder engagement. Which of the project lifecycles should be chosen for this project?
Crashing is an effective schedule compression technique at times when a project is struggling behind schedule. However, increasing the number of resources to twice the original number of the resources does not always cut the time by half. This is due to:
Which of the following statements is incorrect?
You are an experienced project manager and have managed several data center migration projects. You are currently conducting training on the databases, spreadsheets, and management plans you will use during the lifecycle of the project. This training is a tool and technique in what process?
You are managing an oil-drilling project. With oil at $143 per barrel, this could be a highly lucrative project. However, there is a chance that the price of oil will drop below $105 per barrel, which would eliminate the profit in the project. This is an example of:
During the weekly change control board meeting, you invited the facilities manager to speak about the change request to increase the BTUs of the air conditioning system in the new data center. This is an example of what type of tool and technique in the Perform Integrated Change Control process?
You are managing a project that has a task to translate several pages of a document into Spanish. This is similar to a project done last year when a document was translated into German. You are not sure how long it will take to translate into Spanish, so you look at the project plan from the German translation and use that activity duration for your current project. What type of estimating is this an example of?
To control the schedule, a project manager is reanalyzing the project to predict project duration. This is done by analyzing the sequence of activities with the least amount of flexibility. What technique is being used?
A project manager creates a component-specific tool to verify that a set of required steps has been performed. This tool is called a:
The complexity of the information flow in any project depends upon the complexity of the project itself. Information flows through various channels in complex projects. The project management team is responsible for gathering, compiling, analyzing, and reporting this information. Which of the following processes finally releases the project information to the project stakeholders?
The Cost Performance Baseline is a time-phased budget and is used as a basis to measure, monitor, and control overall cost performance of the project. It is usually displayed in the form of:
Contingency Reserves are estimated costs to be used at the discretion of the project manager to deal with:
A project is estimated to cost $50,000 with a timeline of 50 days. After 25 days, the project manager finds that 50 percent of the project is complete and actual costs are $50,000. What is the Cost Performance Index (CPI)?
Your project is midway through a delivery schedule. As the project manager, you want to determine how much work remains. Which is the most accurate way to determine the remaining work the project team must carry out?
An estimating technique that uses a statistical relationship between historical data and other variables (such as square footage in construction or lines of code in software development) is known as:
Lucy is currently preparing a high-level cost estimate for her project in the initiation phase. With the limited detail available to her, what would you expect the range of her estimate to be, and what would you call such an estimate?
Funding requirements for a project are usually in incremental amounts that are not continuous. These increments appear as a step function in the graph depicting Cash flow, Cost baseline and Funding. Any gap at the end of the project between the funds allocated and the cost baseline represents:
You are aware that cost and schedule risks are prevalent in your project. You want to compare the planned project performance with its actual performance during the Monitor Risks process. What should you perform to provide this information?
You are a senior project manager working for RETAMART, a retail shopping network that sells various consumer products. As part of the expansion plan approved by the board of directors, you are a project manager for a new plant. Due to transportation problems, the project has experienced delays; the Schedule Performance Index (SPI) is at 0.6 and the Cost Performance Index (CPI) is at 0.7. However, you expect some improvements over the next few weeks, which may increase the SPI to 1.1 and the CPI to 0.9. Which of the following statements is true if your anticipated changes materialize?
Which of these are not inputs to the Determine Budget process?
David's project is currently in difficult times, and the project stakeholders are not happy with the project updates they receive. In a meeting with the project sponsor, David said the stakeholders' attitude is irrational since he personally ensures that all project communications are accurate and timely. Mary, the project sponsor, advises David that he needs to go the extra mile in managing the stakeholders rather than just managing the project communications. What does Mary mean?
In adaptive lifecycles, such as the agile approach for product development, requirements are documented as user stories that are then __________ just prior to construction.
A construction project requires that government environmental hearings be held prior to site preparation. What kind of dependency is this?
A manager asked to see a list of milestones in the project. This would be available as an output from the:
A planning package is a work breakdown structure component below the control account and above the work package with known work content but without:
Different stakeholders might require dissimilar outcomes from a project. An integral component of stakeholder management is managing these competing expectations throughout the project from initiation to closure. Which of the following management techniques can help in this situation?
There are a number of risks that have been identified in your project. The team has decided not to change the project plan to deal with the risks, but they have established a contingency reserve of money in the event something triggers these risks. This is an example of what type of risk mitigation technique?
Large variations in the periodic expenditure of funds are undesirable for organizational operations. Therefore, the expenditure of funds is frequently reconciled with the disbursement of funds for the project. According to the PMBOK, this is known as:
The Earned Value Management methodology can be used to:
Sam's project has successfully been initiated, and all the major roadblocks are removed. The senior stakeholders have now switched from a leading role to a supportive role. What is Sam's next step once the first version of the project stakeholder register is developed?
A Work Breakdown Structure (WBS) dictionary supports the WBS and is a companion document to the WBS. Which of the following is not included in the WBS dictionary?
The State of New York has contracted with your company to provide a claims payment system for Medicaid benefits. In the contract, a clause states that the State of New York can review your work processes and deliverables. This is an example of:
Control Schedule is part of which Project Management process group?
Mandatory dependencies are those that are inherent in the nature of the work being done. They often involve physical limitations, such as on a construction project when it is impossible to erect the superstructure until the foundation is built. According to the PMBOK, a mandatory dependency is also:
Sandra is managing a software development project. The project has many stakeholders having a negative attitude toward the project. Sandra knows she can't keep everybody happy but still can try her best to manage them. Which of the following can help Sandra manage these negative stakeholders better?
The termination clause and alternative dispute resolution (ADR) mechanism for each procurement in a project is in the:
Jack is the project manager of a project that is halfway through its execution. He is currently looking at the work schedule. He adjusts a few of the schedule milestones and imposes date constraints for some of the work packages. This relates to which of the following processes?
As a project manager, you are concerned with both prevention and inspection of errors in a work product. The difference between prevention and inspection is:
Which of these statements is true?
A storm has damaged the manufacturing facility that is under construction as part of your project. You have just discovered that although the project risk management plan mandated that the facility have insurance against damage and loss, this policy was never acquired, and the project budget must cover the losses. Who is at fault?
You have a schedule activity that can be delayed without delaying the early start date of any subsequent activities. This is an example of:
As the project manager of a project, you had estimated certain activity durations before acquiring all project team members. On acquisition, you find that their actual competency levels are much lower than what you anticipated. In such a case, you will:
The Executive VP of Finance has informed you that you will be the project manager for an energy audit the company is performing in order to save expenses. He has assigned you to identify the stakeholders and to start documenting the high-level assumptions and constraints. Your project is in what stage?
The objective of a transformation project is to move an organization from one state to another state. Before the project begins, the organization is commonly referred to as being in the:
A software vendor on your project is hoping to be awarded a contract providing software for another project at your company. You are not the manager of the other project. However, the vendor offers you tickets to an upcoming professional sports event if you will "put in a good word" for his company to the vendor selection team of the other project. What do you do?
Which of the following predictive project management techniques resembles an agile approach:
A project manager is managing a project in which there are teams located in remote locations in order to obtain cost savings. This is in accordance with organizational guidelines that require that at least 25 percent of the work should be done from a remote location. This is an example of:
The project manager controls the interfacing and overlapping areas of the organization's procurement processes, along with the project schedule, with processes from this area:
The methods used to transfer information among project stakeholders may vary significantly. A project team may apply different techniques and communication technologies to ensure effective and efficient communications. Which of the following must not be a factor to consider while choosing a communication technology?
Once a project's business case has been approved, what should be done next?
You are managing a complex software development project for an external customer. You are using the waterfall approach to manage the project in line with the contractual requirements. However, you are not comfortable with this approach. You believe that customers don't really know what they want upfront; rather, what they want emerges out of repeated two-way interactions over the course of the project. In your current situation, the waterfall approach has its emphasis on upfront requirements capture and design, followed by product development and finally the system testing. The customer will only be involved during the requirements gathering and system testing stages and will be completely out of touch during the development activities. Which of the following can help you mitigate the risk created by the waterfall approach:
You have completed a milestone in your software development project, and you are now verifying that the product meets the specifications outlined in the project management plan. In which process group is this process?
Which of the following may help in ensuring that certain bidders in the procurement process do not receive preferential treatment and that all prospective sellers have a clear and common understanding of the procurement?
The X in the DfX can be:
Which of the following statements regarding Resource Leveling and Resource Smoothing is correct:
In an agile approach to project management, requirements classified as "epics" are decomposed into:
Megawatt is estimating the expected cost of a new ERP system deployment project using the actual costs of an earlier similar ERP system deployment project as the basis for the cost. This is what type of estimating?
Costs incurred in one area of a project can offset costs in another area of the same project. However, it is not enough to consider only the costs of project execution when making project decisions. What other costs external to the project must also be considered?
Your company is way behind schedule in the deployment of a government-mandated change to a health care processing system that must be in production by the end of the year. To meet the due date, you and your team have met and decided to hire an additional 50 programmers to work with the existing staff. This is an example of what?
The key difference between Validate Scope and Control Quality is:
You are managing a fund-raising golf tournament that has a hole-in-one contest. However, your company cannot afford to pay the $1,000,000 award if someone does get a hole in one, so it has elected to take out an insurance policy in the event someone does get lucky. This is an example of:
The Make-or-Buy analysis is a technique used as part of the Plan Procurement Management process. It can determine whether the project team can produce a particular product or service, or if it should be purchased. The analysis to arrive at a decision should include:
What is the logical sequence of the Project Scope Management processes?
Breaking down project activities into smaller components in order to obtain a more accurate cost estimate and then aggregating the estimates of the lower-level components is:
Daniel is managing the development of an e-commerce website for his organization. Daniel enjoys coercive powers. He has assigned Julie, a project team member, to facilitate the team meetings. During any team meeting, Julie must:
Projects are often started as a result of an external factor such as market demand for a new product, a new legislative or regulatory mandate, or a change in technology. This results in the creation of ______ by an entity or organization external to the project.
Bottom-up Cost estimating is typically motivated by the size and complexity of:
The Quality Policy is the intended direction of a performing organization with regard to quality. However, as a project manager in a performing organization, you find the organization lacks a formal quality policy. What should you do in such a case?
Lucy is managing a website development project in an agile environment. She wants to create a burndown chart to present the project's progress to the stakeholders. She adds a diagonal line representing the ideal burndown and a line for daily actual remaining work. She now needs to show the likely variance at the iteration completion. What should she do?
The cost estimates for a project are in the range of +/5 %. What phase is the project likely to be in?
You are setting up your project team, and you are looking at a chart that shows that Systems Development will perform programming, Infrastructure Systems will implement the infrastructure, and the Call Center will handle the customer communication. This is an example of what type of chart?
You have overheard two functional managers arguing about the impacts that your project will have on their departments. What is your best response?
A large construction project for a logistics company will require the expenditure of a large amount of capital. The finance group works with the project manager to project set limits when expenses will be incurred in a given project and to determine whether there are ways to smooth out or level the spending to avoid a single large expenditure in one quarter and none in the next. This is an example of:
Calculation of late finish dates and late start dates for the uncompleted portion of the project is called ____________.
Which of the following PMBOK processes is about using existing knowledge and creating new knowledge to achieve the project's objectives and contribute to organizational learning?
The on-demand scheduling approach used in agile environments is based on the theory-of-constraints and pull-based scheduling concepts from lean manufacturing to limit a team's work in progress. This is also called:
While rating a proposal, one of the requirements was: "The proposed project manager needs to be a certified Project Management Professional, PMP(R)" This is an example of:
Which of the following is Deming's method for continuous improvement?
A decision tree is a Perform Quantitative Risk Analysis technique. A decision tree is represented by a Decision Tree Diagram. The decision tree describes a situation under consideration, the implications of each of the available choices, and the possible scenarios. A Decision Tree Diagram shows how to make a decision among alternative capital strategies known as:
While applying the logical relationships to the project activities, a project manager must be careful not to:
The enterprise environmental factors play an important role during the development of the project stakeholder engagement plan. The following list gives the most significant enterprise environmental factors considered during the Plan Stakeholder Engagement process except one. Which one is it?
There are numerous ways to share information among project stakeholders. Which of the following is the most efficient communication method?
A summary milestone schedule would normally be part of which document?
Which of the following processes deals with maintaining the integrity of baselines by releasing only approved changes for incorporation into the project management plan?
For complex and high value projects, activities of business analysis get started well before the project is initiated. Typically in such cases, the requirements management process starts with:
The Manage Stakeholder Engagement process is a very important project management process. An ineffective effort in this process can sabotage the whole project. Which of the following is the key benefit of this process?
When possible, the detailed project schedule _________ throughout the project to adjust for knowledge gained, increased understanding of the risk, and value-added activities.
The formula for Cost Variance is:
Which of the following should be avoided while applying logical relationships to project activities:
A detailed milestone list is created as an output of what process?
In projects where there is a gap between the real business requirements and the stated business requirements, agile methods are extremely helpful. Agile methods provide a solution to this problem by:
To ensure effective communications throughout a project lifecycle, a project manager should develop a communications plan early in the project. When developing a communications plan, a project manager must consider a number of factors. Which of the following is the least important consideration among the list while developing a communications plan?
Tim is the project manager for a shopping mall construction project which is in its fourth month of execution. According to the project contract, Tim can only issue project invoices when the project is 25%, 50%, 75% and 100% complete in terms of the approved project schedule. Recently the 25% milestone has been reached and Tim is ready to issue his first invoice. According to the contract, the project must be completed in 12 months. What is the project's SPI?
You find out that a project team member has stolen some material from the workplace. The team member regrets the theft and promises not to repeat it again. You must:
As part of the Develop Team process, the project manager has planned for some Team Building activities. Team Building Activities should take place throughout the project lifecycle but will have greater benefit when conducted:
Due to the scarce nature of organizational resources, several trends have become popular in the past several years. Which of the following is NOT a resource management method:
Collect Requirements, Develop Schedule, and Perform Qualitative Risk Analysis are all part of what process group?
You have assembled a group of subject matter experts (SMEs) to define risk probability and impact levels. You and your team are still in what process group?
Which of the following is a tool or technique of the Manage Stakeholder Engagement process?
Which of the following is not an input to the Develop Project Charter process?
The Plan Stakeholder Engagement process has many inputs. Which of the following is an input to the Plan Stakeholder Engagement process that comes from the Conduct Procurements process?
You have the project management responsibility of a virtual team comprising team members from the same company who live in widespread geographic areas, employees who work from home offices and employees with mobility impairments. Virtual teams are formed as a result of which of the following processes?
The term ________ indicates the degree to which a particular product or service meets requirements, while _____________ indicates a category or rank used to distinguish that item from other similar items.
Visiting a construction site to ensure the completed work is the same work specified in the requirements is:
A Responsibility Assignment Matrix illustrates the connections between the work that needs to be done and the project team members. A RACI chart is a type of Responsibility Assignment matrix in which the names of the roles being documented are:
While reviewing project procurement and accounting records for your project, you discover there is a pattern of unauthorized expenses by a specific resource. These expenses are not within the scope of the project and were somewhat camouflaged within a number of large and complicated expense reports. What do you do?
Due to the unexpected release of a similar product from a competitor, the Widgets International executive team has stepped up the pressure on the product team to release the Widget product three months earlier. The project manager uses what technique to shorten the schedule but maintain the project scope?
Which of the following indicates the required cost performance in order to complete the project on budget?
A project to design and build a new aircraft is cancelled after the project has been underway for some time. What process is employed to document what work was done and to what extent it was completed?
The project manager of a large construction project is responsible for ensuring that all changes to the building plans are approved and tracked before they are implemented. These activities form part of which process?
Vendor selection, vendor management, and documentation of lessons learned are tasks that fall under this process:
The Conduct Procurements process receives bids or proposals and applies criteria to select one or more sellers who are both qualified and acceptable as a seller. Which of the following techniques is not a valid technique for this process?
You are managing a project that requires an environmental permit to do work. The approval is in the final stages when a confidential, reliable report is brought to your notice. The report indicates there is a high risk of an environmental hazard due to the project. Your manager tells you it is better to keep quiet at this stage since losses from terminating the project might be very high. You must:
A Work Breakdown Structure is a hierarchical illustration of all the work to be done in a project. A WBS component does not represent:
Work Performance Information is not an output of which of the following processes?
The business case to justify a project typically contains:
Which of the following is not a Risk Diagramming technique?
The Cost of Quality principle includes:
The most recent analysis of Microcorp's new fabrication facility renovation project shows a CPI value of less than 1.0. What does this indicate?
Robert is managing a road construction project. Due to unseasonal weather conditions, the team productivity might be above or below target. This is an example of:
Which of the following is NOT a valid WBS creation approach:
Project performance measurements assess the magnitude of variation from the original cost baseline. Once the degree of cost variation is known, what step is performed next?
A software team tracing the root cause of an application failure can use this to help determine the cause(s) of the failure:
What is a control chart?
Which of the following tools can enhance the visibility of traditional written project plans and other documents to provide a real-time overview of the project status?
The technique of comparing actual or planned project practices to those of other projects to generate ideas for improvement and to provide a basis by which to measure performance is known as:
There is a serious defect in the finished product of a project that was completed a few months ago, resulting in a recall campaign to recall the defective products. What would be the best classification for these types of costs?
Projects with adaptive life cycles use product backlogs to define a project's scope. The product backlog is a set of:
What is the process of random selection and inspection of a work product?
Which of the following processes are usually not performed continuously, but rather, performed periodically as needed:
You have a contract to build a manufacturing plant in Kuala Lumpur. However, you are not familiar with the building codes in Kuala Lumpur or Malaysia, so you are reviewing all their building codes prior to "turning a shovelful of earth." This is an example of:
An automotive designer uses a certain technique to determine which combination of suspension and tires will produce the most desirable ride characteristics at a reasonable cost. To do this, the designer employs a statistical framework and systematically changes all the important parameters instead of changing the factors one at a time. This method is known as:
You are a non-technical project manager. Two highly skilled and knowledgeable resources on your project are in conflict over the best technical solution to meet a project requirement. However, this is not affecting the project schedule. Who is initially responsible for the conflict resolution?
Which of the following are the tools and techniques used in both the Plan Communications Management and Manage Communications processes?
A project manager presented earned value analysis data in a tabular format in a performance report. Another way the project manager could have presented the earned value analysis data is with:
David was required to investigate a business problem and describe the higher-level needs of the business as a whole. David's final reports describes in detail the features, functions and characteristics of the product that will meet the business and stakeholder requirements. What is wrong with David's report?
The project management processes communicate with each other through their inputs and outputs. Which of the following outputs of the Direct and Manage Project Work process is a prime input of the Monitor Stakeholder Engagement process?
Which of the following is the correct sequence of the PMBOK processes that collects work performance data, converts it to work performance information, formats it into work performance reports, and distributes these reports?
As the project manager of a large project, you have just completed the Estimate Costs process. As you begin the Determine Budget process, which of the following would you require as inputs to the process from the Estimate Costs process?
The Direct and Manage Project Work process has three tools and techniques. Two of them are Expert Judgment and Meetings. What is the third one?
A project manager is trying to plan for a contingency reserve as part of the cost estimates for the project. Which of these would be an incorrect way to plan for contingency reserves?
The stakeholder engagement plan is a subsidiary plan of the project management plan. It includes the strategies required to effectively engage project stakeholders. An ineffective stakeholder engagement strategy can lead to project failure. The stakeholder engagement plan:
A collection of formally documented procedures that define how project deliverables and documentation are controlled, changed, and approved is:
Ideally the relationship between a project manager and a business analyst should be:
The costs on a project are typically classified as direct and indirect costs. The cost of electric utilities for the office is:
Which of the following is not an activity related to the Direct and Manage Project Work process?
The stakeholder engagement plan is developed early during project planning phase. However, as the project moves into its execution phase, project stakeholders' needs, interests and/or influence might change. If a significant change happens, what should the project manager do?
Which of the following is an output from the Direct and Manage Project Work process?
Long hours to meet a looming deadline and immense pressure for success from management are causing a decline in team morale. There are occasional conflicts between team members over priorities and resources. How should these non-disruptive conflicts be handled?
One of the senior team members, who is the best performer in your project, plays favorites. A few of the other team members who work closely with this team member have gotten exceptionally good appraisal reports in the past, even though they may not have deserved them. As the project manager, what do you need to actively do?
Which type of risk analysis ranks risks for future action or analysis by evaluating their probability of occurrence and impact?
Your manager is presenting a status report of all projects being run in his division. He reports that all projects are showing a positive CV. However, you know that your status reports for the last several weeks have been reporting a negative CV. What do you do?
A project manager from a buyer organization is invited to lunch by the manager of a seller organization. The project manager's organization does not permit receipt of gifts from vendors. The project manager should:
The accuracy of estimates of the cost of a project will _________ over the life of a project.
Which of the following can prove to be effective in addressing variability risks?
What do the buyer and seller have in common with regard to Control Procurements?
Project managers need to be aware of Student Syndrome, also known as procrastination, which means that people start to apply themselves only at the last possible moment before the deadline. This concept is similar to Parkinson's Law which states that:
Melissa is managing a hardware deployment project and is creating a risk management plan. Which of the following would not be included in this plan?
Linda has been assigned to establish a PMO in her organization. Linda believes this project cannot succeed unless all the key project stakeholders support the project. She also believes she needs to pay special attention to stakeholder management to ensure success of this project. First, she needs to develop her stakeholder register. To produce the project stakeholder register, which of the following processes must Linda start?
A fellow project manager is retiring and moving to the mountains; you will take over his project. Before he leaves, he tells you the project is on schedule but only because he "put the hammer down" on his project team and pushed them relentlessly. Pushing the team to perform activities to accomplish project objectives is a part of:
A technique that enhances brainstorming with a voting process used to rank the most useful ideas so they can be taken up for further brainstorming is:
Which of the following is a type of leadership style in which leaders are hands-off and allow group members to make the decisions:
Your project team is having a dispute with a vendor about whether a specific task is within the project's scope. The scope statement does not provide implementation-level details that could resolve this dispute. There is no WBS, however, because the project sponsor insisted that the project be started right away without pausing to create standard project planning documentation. Who is at fault?
For a project following a predictive life cycle, which of the following statements is most accurate?
Which of the following is one of the most prominent features of a project following agile approach for product development?
You are the project manager for a Fortune 100 IT company, and you are currently engaged in an important project. You want to choose the best contractor for a specialized task. What should you do to evaluate potential contractors?
You have recently finished an advanced project management training course your project budget paid for. Because the budget for your project is not large enough to train any other resources on the project, your manager has asked you to make copies of the course materials and distribute them to the rest of the staff. What do you do?
A project manager is performing Reserve Analysis as a technique in one of the project management processes he is currently working on. Which of the following is likely to be that process?
You are forming a virtual project team that includes members from four different countries around the world. What is NOT an obstacle you must overcome to build an effective team?
Joe is attempting to calculate the probable financial impact of some future uncertain scenarios. What method could he use?
A RAM diagram shows the relationship between ______________ and _____________ in a tabular format.
You took over a project from an individual who was fired. You are reading the project documentation and find that five managers signed the project charter. What should be your primary concern at this time?
As part of Define Activities, you are looking at dependencies used to define the sequence among the activities. Which of these is not a valid type of dependency?
A company is looking for an experienced project manager to manage a large construction project. You meet all the requirements for the position except for one: The organization is looking for a certified PMP with five years of experience, but you have just four years of experience managing similar projects. What is the best way to fill out your application?
Which of the following techniques used in adaptive lifecycles helps in minimizing scope creep?
When are risk identification activities performed?
Bill is the project manager of a software project that was originally estimated to be completed in 12 months. Two months into the project, it is discovered that the original estimating assumptions were fundamentally flawed. The Estimate at Completion (EAC) in such a project will be:
How would you calculate your EAC if the ETC work is performed at the budgeted rate?
A project consists of multiple phases. Which of the following is a valid statement and applies to each phase of the project?
Which of the following is not an example of data that may be presented in a performance report?
Risks may be identified during the entire lifecycle of a project. Identify Risks is what type of process?
The most effective method of resolving conflict or other issues with stakeholders is _________.
At a division project status meeting, all attendees receive a dashboard of cost metrics for each project, and each project manager is presenting the status of his or her project. The metrics for one project show a BAC of $1100, an EV of $998, and an EAC of $1099. However, the project manager is reporting an ETC of $354. What do you do?
Which of the following tools and techniques are not applicable while communicating project information?
Which of the following methods of forecasting EAC and ETC is the most accurate?
Your team has built an exotic sports car for a wealthy client. The project team verified every deliverable against the quality requirements, and the client accepted. Now the project manager is arranging for the car delivery. This is part of which process group?
The project sponsor has asked you to prepare a summary level description of each phase of the project, and also include a summary of the validation information for the final project deliverables. Which document is the sponsor asking you to prepare?
Skills such as empathy, influence, creativity, and group encouragement are valuable assets when managing the project team. These skills are often referred to as ______________.
The cost of running a project management office is an example of what type of cost?
Andrew was working as a senior project manager at a company when he resigned from his position. This company recently hired Jack to replace Andrew. Jack had worked with Andrew in the past, and he knows him personally. Jack is now in charge of a project that Andrew left in the middle. If Jack calls Andrew for an opinion on this project, this constitutes:
Robert has recently joined an automobile manufacturer. He now has a project that was already in the execution phase. Recently, one of the key stakeholders has raised serious concerns over the project's scope. Robert now wants to review the previous project communications to understand how the current project scope was agreed to by all key stakeholders in the past. Where can he find this information?
Which of these is an input to the Collect Requirements process?
Tim is the project manager of a project that has a timeline of 18 months. Tim plans to send daily status reports to all stakeholders. After receiving two such reports, Sue, the project sponsor, informs Tim she would like to have reports every two weeks only. Tim did an analysis of communications requirements and considered various attributes for the communications management plan. What aspect has he missed, which resulted in a daily status report being sent instead of two-week status reports?
A software development project team has determined that the best way to mitigate the risk of not having the computational resources to complete all bug testing on schedule is to add three more servers to the test bed. However, the network may not have enough capacity to handle the extra load of those three servers and could fail. This type of risk is a _______________ risk.
Which of the following enterprise environmental factors is not applicable to the Plan Resource Management process?
As part of the quality control in your project, you are exploring a technique that shows the history and pattern of variation. This is a line graph that shows data points plotted in the order in which they occurred. You are most likely looking at a:
Which of the following actions decreases the risk of the project failing to meet its goals and objectives?
You are assisting Benjamin, another project manager, to interview candidates for a resource position on his project. While reviewing your interview notes together, you notice that he sorts the candidate`s resumes into two piles: One pile for further interviews, the other for candidates that did not meet the requirements for the position. You also notice that he has placed several of the highly qualified candidates in the second pile, stating that those interviewees "did not fit the corporate profile." Upon further review, you discover that all these candidates are of the same ethnic group. What do you do?
As a project manager, you are analyzing a process and looking for opportunities for improvements by identifying and analyzing non-valueadded activities. This relates to which of the following tools and techniques of the Manage Quality process?
Which of the following processes gives the project management team insights into the health of the project?
Which of the following interpersonal skills is of prime importance during the collection and analysis of stakeholders' needs and expectations?
After receiving some news about a delay on one of your project tasks, you review the schedule to determine how it will affect the project. While there is a substantial delay on this task, it is not a critical path item and will not affect delivery of any of your milestones. Another project manager advises you to just present the milestone chart during your meeting with the project stakeholders and tell them the project is progressing as planned. What do you do?
The project manager in charge of a new credit card software project has asked the product manager to create a checklist to assist with identifying risks. A project manager can create a risk checklist from which of the following sources?
A planning technique used to provide products, services, and results that truly reflect customer requirements, by translating those customer requirements into the appropriate technical requirements for each phase of project product development, is:
Administrative closure involves all the activities in a step-by-step manner to satisfy various completion and exit criteria for the project. This is part of which Project Management Knowledge Area?
You are a project manager who is in charge of an important project for your company. The project includes producing widgets for your customer. The collected data helps identify the greatest causes of defects in the overall process. Which technique should you use to determine the correlation between two variables being analyzed?
During the planning phase of your project, your team decided to procure a certain brand of hardware because it had the lowest price and came with free shipping and installation. This approach saved $6,000 over the other brands. Since that purchase, however, you discovered the annual maintenance costs for this hardware are $2,500 per year, and $12,500 over the life of the hardware. These costs were not budgeted in the project, nor were they included in the Total Cost of Ownership (TCO) analysis that was part of the project business case. What should you do?
In a sender-receiver model for communication, information is sent and received between two parties, defined as the sender and the receiver. In such a model, anything that interferes with the transmission and understanding of the message is called:
Which of the following is not an appropriate method for dealing with a negative risk?
Statistical sampling involves choosing part of a population for inspection. Appropriate sampling can often ___________the cost of quality control.
A risk with a positive outcome is an ___________.
Which of the following is not a basic input required to develop an effective project stakeholder engagement plan?
Anne is a project manager. She has evaluated certain responses from prospective sellers and wants to select a contract model that will transfer risk to the seller. Which of the following should she select in order to achieve this?
Predicting future performance based on historical events is called ___________.
Which of the following estimating techniques will cost less but is also typically less accurate?
A project manager is using a Risk Diagramming technique that is a graphical representation of situations showing causal influences, time ordering of events, and other relationships among variables and outcomes. This would be:
You are authorized to approve expenditures above $15,000. For the last several weeks, you have been negotiating the terms and pricing of a contract with a vendor, and you want to keep costs as low as possible. This has been an exceedingly difficult negotiation process. A colleague suggests you tell the vendor you can only approve expenses below $10,000 as a way to keep the price low. What do you do?
A project was estimated to cost $100,000 with a timeline of five months. Due to some unusual causes, the schedule was delayed. At the end of the third month, the project manager reviews the project and finds that the project is 40 percent complete and Actual Costs are $60,000. Assuming that the cost variations observed to date would not continue going forward, the Estimate to Complete (ETC) for the project are:
You are a project manager for Enormous Co. and are currently engaged in a highly visible project. The company is about to implement an independent review to ensure that the project work is continuing to comply with the project`s policies, processes, and procedures. During which process would this review occur?
A project employs a virtual team with team members located in different offices in the same city as well as across different cities. The project manager wishes to build trust and good working relationships. One of the best ways to do this is:
Which process group corresponds to the "act" component of the plan-docheck-act cycle?
Which option is not representative of the inputs, tools and techniques, and outputs of the Direct and Manage Project Work process?
As part of the Risk Response planning for your project, you are trying to come up with a strategy to deal with negative risks or threats. In order to eliminate the impact of a particular risk, you relax the objective that is in jeopardy by extending the project schedule. This is an example of:
You are the Project Manager for the production of an exotic car. You have completed the Define Scope process for your project. Which of the following may be generated through this process?
Perform Qualitative Risk Analysis is a quick way to prioritize how a project team will respond to risks. It is based on risk _________________ and _________________.
A project manager was assigned to a project when the project charter was in development. Which of the following is an input that the project manager will use to develop the project charter?
The Work Breakdown Structure (WBS) is a deliverable-oriented hierarchical decomposition of the work the project team will execute to accomplish the project objectives and create required deliverables. The Create WBS process falls under which knowledge area?
Gene is the project manager of a large highway expansion project. He has a number of stakeholders with competing priorities and agendas, and he often has to resolve conflicts among stakeholders. Which knowledge area manages communications with the project stakeholders?
Which of the following statements regarding team-building is correct?
Which of the following is NOT considered a method in the Manage Communications process?
Robert's project is a high-priority project for his organization. Project stakeholder engagement is crucial for the project's success. Robert needs to discuss the project stakeholder engagement levels with his project team on a regular basis. Which of the following is the best platform where Robert can review this with his team?
Reporting performance about scope to stakeholders is a part of which knowledge area?
Earned Schedule (ES) is an extension to the theory and practice of EVM. Earned schedule theory replaces the schedule variance measures used in traditional EVM with ES and actual time (AT). Using the alternate equation for calculating schedule variance:
You are the project manager of a project whose team has interacted with a number of stakeholders. You believe that in order to have an objective project performance appraisal, you would like to obtain feedback for the project team members from all the people they have worked with, including superiors, peers and subordinates. Project performance appraisals are performed during which of the following processes?
Which of the following is not a tool and technique of the Plan Resource Management process?
Which of these is not an Enterprise environmental factor that can influence the Plan Resource Management process?
A project involved team members situated in Arizona, Nebraska, New York, and Ireland. Which of the following activities becomes crucial in such a team environment?
You are managing a project. An audit team wants to know where they can find information on training plans for the project team members and certification requirements. This are in the:
You are managing a project and find you need to apply resource leveling. Which of the following tools can help you identify resources that are overallocated?
Clear criteria for rewards and a planned system for their use promotes and reinforces desired behaviors in the project. Creating a recognition plan with established times for rewards ensures that recognition takes place and is not forgotten. This is usually part of the:
Ground rules are established to set clear expectations regarding acceptable behavior by the project team members. Whose responsibility is it to enforce ground rules?
Conflict management is a tool and technique of which of the following processes?
Your project is nearing completion, but a previously unidentified risk has arisen, and it could significantly affect one of the project deliverables. What do you do?
James is currently managing a software upgrade project. He has recently identified and analyzed his key project stakeholders. He is now searching his organizational process assets for a template with which he can update the results of this analysis along with the planned strategies required to engage the stakeholders effectively. Which of the following should he search for?
As a project manager based at the customer location for a performing organization, you build rapport with a customer manager. As the project progresses, the manager asks you to make certain changes to the project scope and wants this handled on an informal basis. You should:
A large network hardware upgrade project was scheduled to take place over a weekend. During the course of the implementation, several previously unidentified dependencies on additional materials were discovered. The project manager gave approval for the tech staff doing the implementation to procure with corporate credit cards several hundred dollars' worth of additional equipment required to complete the implementation. However, these additional expenses caused the project to exceed its budget. How should the project manager handle this?
Which of the following PMBOK processes produces a project stakeholder engagement plan?
The project management team performed activities such as measuring, examining, and verifying to determine whether work and deliverables met requirements and product acceptance criteria. Which of the following choices refers to a different set of activities than the ones just mentioned?
___________________ is performed on risks that have been prioritized by the Perform Qualitative Risk Analysis process as potentially and substantially impacting the project's competing demands.
Which of the following tools will help trace the requirements to product design?
As the Project Manager for Midway Carnival Rides, you are beginning the Define Scope process. Which of the following is a key input to this process?
Which of the following processes belong to the planning process group?
A key output of Plan Resource Management is a list of project roles and responsibilities. What should this document include?
What is the best way to show, at a glance, all the work packages or project activities assigned to a specific organizational department?
RACI stands for______________, ________________, ___________, _______________.
Rob has been assigned to manage a complex project. Rob has recently acquired his PMP certification and is excited about applying his newly acquired knowledge to his project. During the project initiation, he produced the stakeholder register and impressed his project sponsor. Rob is now about to develop the stakeholder engagement plan for his project. This has made the project sponsor a bit uncomfortable because he thinks Rob is spending too much time doing paperwork instead of actually executing the project work. The project sponsor has asked Rob to explain the difference between the stakeholder register and the stakeholder engagement plan. How should Rob respond?
Which of the following stakeholder analysis techniques is recommended when you need to analyze project stakeholders based on their power, urgency, and legitimacy?
You are a project manager working on a project to create high-efficiency electric motors for a company introducing a new electric golf cart. Your company's president is keenly interested in the project and requests a chart that shows the number of defects by type ordered by their frequency of occurrence. Which type of chart would BEST meet this request?
What term defines the work needed to deliver a product, service, or result?
During a weekly status meeting, a team member suggests adding a component to the project. As the project manager, you maintain that all focus should stay on the current scope and not on any enhancements. Focusing on the current scope is an example of:
What type of method uses a weighting ranking system for quantifying qualitative data to minimize the effect of personal bias during the process of selecting a seller?
You have been offered a position managing a project that will last 12 months. However, you know that in six months, you will be relocating to another state for family reasons. What should you do?
A project manager wants to proactively monitor a manufacturing process to determine whether the quality level is within acceptable limits for that process. What tool will help with this?
You are planning a storage device migration in a data center. During this phase of the project, who should control the project?
As project manager, you find you are constantly dealing with conflict among your team members. Everyone argues over sharing available project resources, so you plan to use a conflict resolution method to alleviate the tension among team members. What conflict resolution method is not recognized by the Project Management Institute?
In a project that was yet to begin, many of the project team members were known in advance. This is:
You have been managing a construction project in a developing country, and now you are closing the project. The tools and equipment that were used on the project have to be returned to your company's European headquarters. A nongovernmental organization that builds and repairs medical facilities in this country has come to you to request that this equipment be donated to them. What should you do?
All of the following are components of an effective change control process, except:
What similarity exists between a cost-reimbursable contract and a timeand-materials contract?
Kate's project is in execution. During an internal project review meeting, Kate learns that the stakeholder engagement plan needs an update. The last update was done two weeks earlier. According to the stakeholder engagement plan, the plan must be reviewed and updated on a monthly basis. The nature of the required update does not require following the formal change control process. What should Kate do?
A team of engineers is reviewing a scatter diagram to determine how the changes in two variables in a new type of automobile tire are related. The closer the points on the diagram are to a diagonal line, _______________.
Which of the following stakeholder groups, especially if the size of the group is large, is ideal for the success of the project?
You are a project manager who is in charge of an important project for your company. The project is 40 percent complete after three months and has cost $350,000. The budget for the project is $950,000 and is scheduled to last eight months. How is the project performing?
Sarah is about to start developing her project stakeholder engagement plan. She is currently gathering all the required inputs for this process. She has already created the stakeholder register and has gotten access to the organizational process assets and enterprise environmental factors. Which of the following inputs is also critical for the process?
Product scope is measured against the product requirements, while project scope is measured against:
In the procurement process, the seller may be viewed initially as a bidder, then as the selected source, and then as the contracted supplier. The seller will typically manage the work as a project. In such an instance, which of the following is not true?
The product design your project team developed was extremely well received by the customer. There were two key contributors to this design. The customer calls you to tell you how pleased he is with the design. What do you tell him?
Lucy is managing a complex design-and-build project. Stakeholder involvement and influence have been significant since the project's inception. Under such circumstances, the Monitor Stakeholder Engagement process should be:
Tom is a project manager who is assigned to a foreign country to manage a project. The project is a large one and comprises smaller sub-teams contributing to the entire project. As part of rewards and recognition within the project, Tom plans for a team award for the best sub-team. Recognition and Rewards is associated with which of the following processes?
A first-time project manager was assigned to a project that had a duration of three months. In order to get a head start on the project, the manager took an older, completed the project and incorporated all the tools, techniques, and checklists in their entirety from that project into the current one. The older project was completed in 14 months' time and was remarkably similar in nature. The most appropriate comment on this would be:
A first-time project manager wanted to have a "perfect project." This manager informed the customer that this project would not accept change requests of any kind and that the scope would need to be defined precisely at the very start of the project. The customer agreed to this request. What would your comment on this situation be?
A project manager has scheduled technical training for his or her project team members to increase their skills. During which of the following processes will the team member receive this training?
You have identified a risk that will negatively affect your security project. You and your team have decided to use an older encryption technology because of the high risk associated with the new technology. What type of risk strategy are you using?
A project is contracted on a Cost-Plus-Fixed-Fee (CPFF) basis. The targeted cost is US$200,000 with a fee of US$30,000. If the project comes in at US$170,000, what would be the total cost of the contract?
A project is contracted on a Cost-Plus-Incentive-Fee (CPIF) basis. The contract states that if the final costs are less than expected costs, the sharing formula for cost savings is 80:20. The targeted cost is US$500,000 with a 10 percent fee. If the project comes in at US$450,000, what would be the total cost of the contract?
A project is contracted on a Cost-Plus-Fixed-Fee (CPFF) basis with a fee of 10 percent of estimated costs. The estimated cost is US$50,000. If the project comes in at US$75,000 with no changes in project scope, what would be the total cost of the contract?
Creating a sense of community is a benefit of what type of strategy?
You are new to project management, but you have been managing a small project successfully. Now, management has given you another project to manage, something you are excited about. However, the new project is growing exponentially every day. You have also learned that a project manager you work with managed a similar project last year. What should you do?
A seller was notified they were one of the selected sellers based on their proposal. The seller immediately circulated an internal newsletter stating they had just been awarded a large contract for a period of five years. Would the newsletter be factually correct?
You have been asked by your project manager to help create a chart that illustrates the project resources that will be working on each work package. What would be the best type of chart to use?
As the project manager of a development project, you are aware that there is a slight defect in the developed product; as a result, it will fail to meet certain regulatory standards. This was due to faulty requirements. You are also aware that the product will continue to function properly even though it fails to meet those standards. Your customer manager asks you to certify that the product meets the necessary regulatory standards, stating that this will not be verified when the report is submitted to the necessary authorities. Your stance is that:
The selection of lifecycle for the project, the processes to be applied to each phase, and the results of the tailoring by the project management team are usually found in the:
You are managing a project for your company constructing an office complex in another country. The construction work on two of the buildings is complete, and those buildings are ready for move-in. However, the construction supervisor informs you that you must pay a fee to a local government agency to issue an occupancy permit for any new construction in that country. What should you do?
Which of the following is NOT a valid statement regarding the critical path method?
You are the project manager of a large IT project. A manager from a company contracted to work on the project offers you free tickets to a local sporting event. The tickets are expensive, but your organization has no formal policy regarding gifts. What is the best way to handle the offer?
Which of the following techniques can ensure that the stakeholders are engaged at appropriate project phases and to obtain or confirm their continued commitment to the success of the project?
As project manager, you scheduled a status update meeting. During the meeting, a problem developed, and the group discussed it. The day after the meeting, Kevin approached you and expressed his concern that the problem was not truly resolved. After thinking about it, he felt that his concerns were still valid and should be addressed. What conflict resolution method was likely used at the status meeting?
You are a project manager for your company. Part of the project requires producing 10,000 widgets, which your company will outsource. The company has agreed to pay all related costs and 5 percent of the estimated project costs. What type of contract has been negotiated?
You are the Project Manager for JT's Lumber Yard. You are trying to forecast estimates for the final phase of the project you are currently working on. Based on the performance of the project to date, which formula can be used to estimate the total value of the project when completed, assuming similar variances will not occur?
You work as an engineer for a large engineering firm. During this past week, you have corresponded with your department supervisor about the horizontal stabilizers required for the wings on a new aircraft you are designing. Which communication dimension does this represent?
Which of the following tools helps in determining the gaps between the current and desired stakeholder engagement levels?
Which of the following statements about team-building activities is incorrect?
Julia is managing a software development project. Recently, an unexpected event delayed the project by 15 days. Julia has called a team meeting to identify measures to take to bring the project back on schedule. A measure that is taken to bring future results back in line with the project plan is best described as?
Which of the following is not a Tuckman's team development stage?
Which process is MOST responsible for managing changes to the schedule components of the Project Management Plan?
Why is the project change log a prime input to the Manage Stakeholder Engagement process?
Your project team works in two different buildings across the city. The team has been struggling to perform effectively and has a difficult time resolving problems. What would be the BEST team development technique to resolve this issue?
You have been asked to create a graphic display of schedule-related information, listing schedule activities on the left side of the chart, dates on the top, and activity durations as date-placed horizontal bars on the right side. What is such a chart called?
Which of the following techniques can help clarify the structure, requirements, and other terms of the purchases so that mutual agreement between a buyer and a seller can be reached prior to signing the contract?
A complicated software project was authorized by a project sponsor. However, the users who were intended to use the product found it extremely difficult to articulate their requirements. What technique can be employed to elicit requirements for such a project?
The manager of a project that your company is running in another country is at the corporate headquarters for a company-wide project management meeting. During a break, you overhear the project manager discussing payments made to local municipal governments for construction permits for the project. Your company has a strict policy about paying or taking bribes. What should you do?
Organizational process assets are key inputs to the Manage Stakeholder Engagement process. The key elements of the organizational process assets that are used during this process are organizational communication requirements, issue management procedures, and the change control procedures. Which of the following is also a key organizational process asset that must be considered during this process?
Which of the following is an incorrect classification of a feasibility study?
Which tool is BEST used to display how a company structures itself departmentally?
You have recently been successful in passing the Project Management Professional exam. Others within the organization you work for are also pursuing the certification and have sought your assistance. They have requested that you provide them with a detailed list of the questions that you had on the exam. What is the FIRST course of action you should take?
The project sponsor asks you to increase budget estimates by 25 percent to ensure that the project has enough funds budgeted. What should you do?
You are the project manager for a project and have just entered the third year of a scheduled four-year project. You need to evaluate new risks that have arisen since the project began. What agenda item do you need to add to your next team meeting?
What is the BEST tool/technique that provides expected cost of a procurement by a third party and helps identify significant variations from cost estimates prepared in-house?
To create a quality product, the project management team invested in training the project team members and purchasing high-end equipment. Such costs are:
You are managing an enterprise solution deployment project. The end users are not happy with the solution. You decide to meet the end users and find out that they haven't received proper training on the new system. What should you do first?
You are the project manager for GeoThermal Systems. Which of the following must be done FIRST before proceeding with a new project?
You are a project manager for an automotive parts company. Your organization was hired to produce clutches for an exotic car company. This will involve the design and production of custom clutches. During the course of the project, as you review a quality control statistics chart that examines every clutch produced for the month, you notice several cases where the spring component of the clutch is expanding with too much force and is falling outside the upper control limit. Which type of Quality Control tool are you most likely using?
You are the project manager for Wicked Fast Cars Corp. You are working on a project for the Human Resources department that is scheduled to take one year. After three months into the project, you calculate the EV at $35,000 and the PV at $45,000. Which option below represents the value for the SV?
You are a project manager creating the final project report. Which information would you NOT include in this report?
The sponsor of your facilities upgrade project has left the company to join another organization. Several weeks later, you are reviewing the business case for the project, and you find that there are several inconsistencies between what is stated in the business case and what is described in the project scope. Further research shows that the business case as a whole is based on inaccurate information. What do you do?
A first-time project manager is trying to understand the difference between configuration control and change control. The difference is:
The two key processes that happen early in the project lifecycle are:
All of the following statements are true about the cause-and-effect diagram except:
You are the project manager for Commodities, Inc. You are involved in a new project to create an internal website for the employees that will allow them to view events within the company. All of the following options listed are project constraints except:
If you had an experience with a particularly well or poorly performing vendor, what is the correct way to document this experience for future projects?
What BEST describes the role of the project team members?
What is the MAIN reason for controlling the project scope?
A project manager is trying to budget time for the various processes in the Project Schedule Management Knowledge Area. As project activities are performed, in which of these processes will the majority of effort occur?
Which strategy attempts to reduce the probability and the impact of a risk to the point where the risk is acceptable?
You are a project manager for Groceries 'R' Us, a supermarket chain, and are currently working on a project to build a new outlet. The planned values (PV) for the foundation and the frame were $150,000 and $500,000. After five months, you do a performance measurement analysis. You are currently not ahead of schedule. The actual costs for the foundation and frame were $175,000 and $650,000. At this point, 100 percent of the foundation is complete, and only 80 percent of the frame is complete. Which value represents the cost performance index (CPI) to two decimal places at this point in the project?
A project manager prepared quantitative assessments of the probable costs required to complete a project and produced activity cost estimates. He or she also prepared some supporting detail for these estimates. Which of the following would not be a supporting detail for cost estimates?
A project manager is estimating activity durations for a project. Which of the following should he or she consider while performing this activity?
Which of the following is an output of the Conduct Procurements process?
Which technique is NOT commonly used to align the timing of activities with available resources?
You have been asked to determine the early start and finish dates for the activities that make up a project. What would be the BEST technique to use?
In projects with adaptive life cycles, the overall scope of the project will be decomposed into a set of requirements and work to be performed, sometime referred to as:
Communications management plans should include all of the following except:
When one factor used to determine the effort required to produce a unit of work is increased while all other factors remain fixed, a point will eventually be reached at which additions of that one factor start to yield progressively decreased productivity. This is known as:
Which of the following approaches deliberately spends less time trying to define and lock project scope early during the project and spends more time establishing the process for requirements gathering, scope definition and refinement?
You are the Project Manager and are responsible for the development of a mall. As with any construction project, there will be multiple iterations of blueprints and engineering drawings. Therefore, you have decided to create an online database that can be used to query the documents by name, type, date, etc. This is an example of what type of communication tool?
You are working on a project with all the team members located in geographically different areas, and all communication is by email and chat. It is sometimes hard to infer the true meaning of these messages because you cannot see facial expressions or hear tones of voice. This is an example of:
In complex and high value projects, which of the following activities will typically be performed by a business analyst prior to the project initiation?
Your project calls for communication with an extremely large audience. What communication method would be appropriate under such circumstances?
If you are writing a proposal for additional funding, which communication style should you choose?
Which of the following two project documents are sometimes perceived as containing a certain degree of redundancy?
You have completed your estimates for your project and have determined that it will take 10 months to complete. However, your project sponsor insists that it be completed in nine months. How do you handle this?
A project manager prepared a composite resource calendar. Which of the following is unlikely to be part of the resource calendar?
You have just become the project manager of a project already in execution. During your first week on the job, you receive multiple requests from different stakeholders asking for project reports in various formats. These requests overwhelm you. What should you do first?
A project was awarded based on a competitive proposal. Management made a commitment that a few key team members would work on the project. When such assignments happen, they are:
You have recently been assigned to a research project. Although there is a limited number of key stakeholders, there is a big number of other stakeholders involved in this project, especially the ones who will be using the research's outcome. You have some specific questions. Which of the following is the best way to quickly obtain responses from a big group of stakeholders?
Your project team members have just started to work together and are now adjusting their work habits and behaviors to support each other. Which stage of the Tuckman ladder has your team just entered?
A project manager had scheduled a number of training programs for his team. However, he was aware that apart from planned training, unplanned training also took place in a number of ways. Which of these is not one of the ways in which unplanned training can take place?
As part of the procurement process, the procuring organization elected to have an estimate of costs prepared by an outside professional estimator. The estimator came up with an estimate of $500,000. However, the cost estimates prepared by prospective sellers were in the range of $200,000. How can this be best interpreted?
Which of the following allows a project management team to communicate all approved and rejected changes to the stakeholders consistently?
Which of the following are more important inputs to the Manage Stakeholder Engagement process in relation to the others?
Which of the following is incorrect?
Linda is a first-time project manager and is analyzing a project schedule. She intends to apply resource leveling, and she has the following guidelines on Resource Leveling. Which of these four statements is incorrect?
The Code of Ethics and Professional Conduct has as its foundation four values identified by practitioners from the global project management community. They are:
Prompt lists are usually developed based on historical information and knowledge accumulated from previous similar projects. Which of the following statements about risk prompt lists is wrong?
Lena is managing the construction of a new office facility for her company. The project is halfway through the execution. The project sponsor has asked Lena to ensure that all key project stakeholders are still committed to the project. How can Lena assess the stakeholders' current engagement levels?
The list of identified risks is found in the risk register. However, the overall high-level project risks is first listed in the:
A number of identified risks occurred early in a project. As a result, most of the project objectives ended up in jeopardy. The project manager decided to present a case to management that the project be closed down. This is an example of:
20 percent of the work was completed in a project. At this stage, the project manager determined that the budget at completion (BAC) was no longer viable and developed a forecasted estimate at completion (EAC). What index can the project manager use to look at the calculated projection of cost performance that must be achieved on the remaining work?
A project uses rounding of activity cost estimates data to the nearest $100, uses staff hours as the unit of measure for resources, and has a variance threshold of 10 percent deviation from the baseline plan. These approaches are typically documented in the:
You are two days late on reporting the status for a project you are managing. The status report indicates that the project is lagging behind schedule. During the current week, you are confident of making up some of the lost time. How should you report project status?
You are a business development manager at a mid-sized automobile manufacturing company. Recently, you were given a project to assess the feasibility of manufacturing light-duty trucks in a Southeast Asian country. To develop a cost estimate, you visit the country with a team of experts to analyze local resources such as power, labor, and real estate. After the visit, you discuss the findings with an automobile manufacturing consultant. The consultant notes that the local laws and government bureaucracy typically make foreign investors spend more than a year obtaining all necessary permits. To avoid these delays, the consultant advises giving a small amount of company stock to the son of the country's president. In return, the president's son will personally expedite the issuing of all required permits. What should you do?
Sally, a project manager who is a PMP, discovered an error in the estimation of a project. A certain cost was double calculated; as a result, the budget, which is already approved, was now in excess by $25,000. She knows that publicizing this information may cause her to get a poor performance appraisal, since her company is meticulous about such matters. What should she do?
Conformance to requirements and fitness for use are key concepts in quality management. Which of the following is another name for customer needs?
At the beginning of the project, a project manager realized that the technical expertise of the team was limited, a risk to the project. Midway through the project, the project manager decided this was no longer a risk and considered it outdated. As part of which process would he do the risk reassessment?
You were just hired by a waste management company to develop a solid waste management program in an underdeveloped country. The project will be on a build-operate-transfer basis and will have a two-year duration. At the close of the project, local authorities will run the program. The World Bank sponsors the project, and a large consortium has received the award. Your company is subcontracted to do this project along with two more contractor companies. After the project scope was finalized, you developed a cost estimate of US$5.5 million. The sponsor reviews your detailed costing sheets and is concerned about the total cost figure. He tells you that the maximum allowable budget he can allocate for this project is US$5 million. What should you do?
A certain project was in the Collect Requirements phase. The product's eventual users could not define their requirements. In this scenario, which of the following tools could have helped determine the requirements?
All team members have not yet been hired for a project. However, the project manager went ahead with estimating activity durations, budgeting, and other activities. What could likely happen to the activity durations?
The senior analyst on a project came up with Activity Duration Estimates as follows: Activity A: 10 days + a lag of two days; Activity B: 1 week + a lead of three days. The project manager who reviewed these estimates raised some objections to them. What would they most likely be?
The sponsor of a project created a document that included the business need and the cost-benefit analysis. What would this document be termed as?
Mark is managing a telecom network deployment project. The buyer of the telecom network is an external entity. Recently, the customer requested that all future project updates be posted to their information system automatically. In order to implement this, the project team needs to customize their project management information system so it can be integrated with the customer's information system. This is a new customer requirement that was not a part of the original project's scope. What should the project manager do?
Variance analysis refers to cost performance measurements used to determine the magnitude of variation in comparison to the original cost baseline. What is the trend on the percentage range of acceptable variances as the project progresses?
Many organizations consider contract administration to be an administrative function separate from the project organization. Who carries out the function of contract administration in such organizations?
An experienced project manager was assigned a project of small scope. Which of the following could be true of the project?
A project was randomly selected for a quality audit, and the external auditor found various issues and nonconformance. The project manager lodged a complaint with the quality department that this was improper procedure, and he should have received notice since an external auditor was involved. What is your view?
You are reviewing the response to an RFP issued by your company for a project that will last a year and exceed US$5 million. Three vendors have been shortlisted. The first, Nosteltec, Inc., is a relatively new company in this industry. It has assembled a team of industry experts with vast industry experience and qualifications. The second company, Xen Contractor, has been in business for 20 years. You and your company have a long and positive history working with this vendor. The third company is SonoNet LLC. It has been in business for 10 years and has a reputation for extensive expertise and superior delivery. They are also well-known for being one of the more expensive providers in the market. You have many relationships with the Xen Contractor staff, which you established during prior procurement contracts with this company. As a result, a project manager from Xen Contractor, with whom you are friendly both personally and professionally, calls you for clarification on a point
During the procurement process, a contractual relationship is established between a buyer and a seller. During the contract lifecycle, what is the correct sequence in which the following terminology is applied to a seller: Vendor, selected source, and bidder?
A project manager is analyzing the relationship between the consumption of project funds and the work being accomplished for such expenditures. In which project management process would this be done?
One of the stakeholders of a project initiated a change request, which was then documented in the change control system. Who would typically be responsible for approving or rejecting the change request?
A critical project rollout was delayed because one of the stakeholders did not receive necessary communication on time. On further analysis, the project manager discovered that the communication was sent to the wrong teams. This could have happened because:
While sequencing activities for a project, the project management team applied certain discretionary dependencies. This was based on their knowledge of best practices within the project application area. What is the potential risk involved in using such dependencies?
Activity attributes extend the description of the activity by identifying various components associated with the activity. Typically, how many attributes are associated with each activity?
Due to a tight project schedule, a project manager did not document lessons learned throughout the project cycle. However, at the end of the project, he finally documented the lessons learned. Your comment on this is:
A project manager is preparing the WBS for a software project. The WBS includes all the product and project work but excludes the project management work. From the following choices, choose a statement that correctly describes this situation.
As part of earned value management (EVM), a project manager is calculating the to-complete performance index (TCPI) based on EAC. The data he has is as follows: The budget at completion for the project is $100,000. The earned value for the project is $25,000. The actual costs to date are $40,000, and the estimate at completion is $115,000. What is the TCPI that he will get?
How can changes be made to a project management plan once the project manager baselines it?
The morale of the team members of a project is very low. The team members feel they were not given opportunities to participate in the organizational team development activities due to over-allocation to project tasks, and so, they missed opportunities to develop. Which of the following is the most likely cause of this situation?
Given multiple alternatives, the group decision method that allows the largest block in a group to decide (even if more than 50 percent of the members of the group do not support the decision) is:
In a multi-phase project, the procurement team decided to close the procurements applicable to a particular phase of the project. What happens to unresolved claims?
During the Control Scope process, analysis of the scope performance resulted in a change request to the scope baseline. This change request will be processed for review and disposition in the:
The quality cost of a project rose significantly during the course of the project. A post-mortem analysis of the increased cost revealed that this was due to poorly defined acceptance criteria. During which phase should the acceptance criteria have been properly captured?
You are an electrical engineer with extensive experience in managing transmission projects but limited experience with electronic design projects. However, in a stretch assignment, you were recently transferred to another department in your company that focuses on electronic design. Furthermore, you were asked to lead a highly important project involving both transmission and electronic design. In preparation for a meeting with your manager to discuss this opportunity, you review the initial project design brief. Due to your limited background in electronic design, a number of items in this document seem unclear to you. When you arrive at your meeting, your manager asks if you will be leading the project. How do you respond?
A seller began a project that was contracted on a time-and-materials (T&M) basis. Based on the agreed-upon rates and effort, the initial contract amount was $100,000 over a one-year period. However, when the project was completed, the total contract value turned out to be $350,000 over a two-year period. What mechanism could the buyer have used to prevent this unlimited cost growth and schedule change?
The Budget at Completion (BAC) for a project is $50,000. The Actual Costs (AC) to date are $10,000. The Earned Value (EV) is $7,000. At this stage, the project management team did a manual bottom-up summation of costs and forecast an Estimate to Complete (ETC) of $50,000. What is the Estimate at Completion (EAC) for the project?
Projects, portfolios, and programs are different entities in an organization. Which of the following choices states a correct relationship between them?
Carole is managing a hotel refurbishment project. She has identified her project's key stakeholders. Carole now wants to expand this list of stakeholders and convert it to a comprehensive list of project stakeholders. What should Carole do?
Janice, a project manager, wanted to obtain early feedback on the project requirements. However, she was concerned that the abstract representations of the requirements might not elicit useful feedback. Which of the following tools and techniques might help her overcome this hurdle?
You are the project manager of a project and are about to conduct a risk identification exercise in a few days' time. You want to remind the participants in the exercise beforehand of the various sources from which risk may arise in the project. What could you use to help you do this?
Ron is a project manager handling an alternate water-supply project. During a project performance review, he notices the following: (i) Activity A, on the critical path, is delayed by four days. (ii) Activity B, not on the critical path, is delayed by nine days. (iii) Activity C, on the critical path, is delayed by two days. (iv) Activity D, not on the critical path, is delayed by five days. In what sequence should Ron prioritize his efforts in addressing these delays?
Many quality problems plagued a project. The quality of the work products deviated considerably from specifications. The project manager decided to do a root cause analysis. What activities does a root cause analysis include?
Mary has recently finalized her project management plan and has gotten it approved. She is managing a complex manufacturing process improvement project. The project stakeholders' constant support and commitment are crucial for the success of the project. Which of the following are the most important stakeholder management processes at this stage?
An important aspect of project management is the handling of stakeholder expectations. Typically, at what level are the stakeholders with respect to the project manager?
Public recognition of superior performance creates positive reinforcement for the team members. When is the best time for a project manager to recognize team members' performance?
The requirements elicitation team has generated a large number of ideas during sessions to gather product and project requirements. Which of the following techniques is best suited to sorting these ideas into groups for review and analysis?
One of the performance requirements of a company website development project is that the home page should load in one second. Such performance requirements are usually part of:
Anna has recently taken over a project as the project manager. The project is early in the executing phase. Although all the key stakeholders signed off on the project scope statement, Anna learns that some of the key stakeholders do not fully understand the project scope. The stakeholders' constant support is crucial for the success of the project. What must Anna do?
You have just joined a new organization as a project manager. You have heard a number of rumors about the procurement manager having possible underhanded dealings with suppliers. However, you have no proof these rumors are true. Your project requires a large number of dump trucks. Company policy mandates that all purchases go through the procurement department rather than the department employees. The value of the dump truck purchase is US$395,000, and the contract went to a supplier your company regularly uses. Shortly after taking delivery of the dump trucks, you learn the procurement manager is driving a new car. What should you do?
The project management team expects that during the course of the project there could be delays in component delivery due to strikes, changes to the permitting processes, or extensions of specific engineering durations. What analysis could be helpful in preparing contingency and response plans to mitigate these issues?
In the earned value management technique, the cost performance baseline is:
A seller entered into a contract with a buyer. At the end of the project, the seller was reimbursed for the cost of the project but received a low fee based on certain subjective criteria that were specified in the contract. What type of contract is this likely to be?
You have just completed a solid waste management project in an underdeveloped country. The contractor you are working for has a strict policy of abiding by local laws and rules although the local resources working on the project have a much more lax approach to following laws and policies. Now at the end of the project, you are handing over the operational equipment to the local operators and disposing of the leftover inventory and other materials that were used during the project. More than 50 percent of the toxic materials used during the project remains in your inventory. There is no law that would prohibit you from disposing of either the type or quantity of remaining materials in the local sewage system. What should you do?
Progressive elaboration is least applicable to which of the following processes?
During a cost performance review with certain senior officers from the finance department, you discover there are certain inconsistencies in the way cost performance reporting is done, and you obtain data that shows these officers are deliberately misleading senior management. What should you do?
Your company is planning to bid on a project in an application area you have never worked before. You are aware your company does not have any resources with the necessary expertise, but you are confident of ramping up the necessary skills and delivering the project successfully. Further, the buyer has not specifically asked for prior experience of completed projects of similar size and scope. Your management is pressuring you to submit a bid. What should you do?
Which of the following processes goes beyond the distribution of relevant information and seeks to ensure that the information being communicated to project stakeholders is appropriately generated, as well as received and understood?
Eric, a project manager, is a certified PMP. He is responding to an RFP from a buyer and needs to fill in details on his company's financial performance. His company has performed poorly during the current quarter, and the results will be published in two to three days. However, the company has done very well in the previous quarters. The RFP is due in 10 days, and all the information in the RFP is complete except the financial information. What should Eric do?
You are managing a project with more than 130 procurement contracts. Because of the number of contracts, your project team includes a procurement manager and a procurement assistant. Company policy requires that certain types of procurements be advertised to potential bidders by means of newspaper advertisements. The procurement assistant typically reviews the bids received and shortlists the suppliers for further review by the procurement team. During a meeting to review and select a vendor from the shortlisted suppliers, you discover that one of the suppliers is a company your cousin owns. Which of the following is your best course of action?
A buyer and seller are looking at getting into a long-term relationship spanning 10 years. Both parties would like to be protected from the unstable financial conditions of their country, which are beyond their control. What type of contract is appropriate for such a relationship?
Which of the following quality control tools and techniques may not be used for root cause analysis?
Midway through the Collect Requirements process, a project manager finds there are many unresolved issues regarding product requirements. Which of the following is usually the best way to discover and resolve issues?
During a project update meeting, one of the key stakeholders expressed his displeasure over the project management approach. One percent of the produced deliverables had minor defects which required a rework. This stakeholder has been a resisting stakeholder so far. What must the project manager do to bring the future project performance in line with the approved quality requirements?
A project manager would like to resolve conflicts by a give-and-take attitude rather than by a one-sided approach. Which of these approaches is he likely to use?
A small project with a limited budget is trying to curtail costs. Which of the following processes may be eliminated in such a project?
A number of deliverables were submitted to the buyer as part of a project. Where would the project manager find documentation on the requirements for formal deliverable acceptance and on how nonconforming deliverables can be addressed?
Late in the project cycle, it was discovered that some of the project's human resources should have trained in a specific methodology. Where should these training strategies have first been documented?
You are managing an electronic chip design project for a customer. There are a number of engineers and subject matter experts from the customer's organization that have been assigned as resources to the project plus several additional design engineers that your company has supplied. All the engineers were involved in the development of a prototype chip, an extremely time-consuming and expensive process. Upon the completion of the prototype, you submit it for review to ensure there are no patent infringement issues with the design. However, the review determines there are several issues that could result in an intellectual property dispute with the patent owners should the prototype design be released commercially. Resources from your company developed the affected prototype elements, as well as from your customer's organization. What should you do?
While managing a large project, the project manager decided to include indirect costs as part of his cost estimate. If indirect costs are included in an estimate, which of the following is true?
Which of these is not a legitimate model used to analyze stakeholders?
A project manager analyzed the project's communication requirements and decided that 10 out of the 30 stakeholders in the project would only need voicemail updates of certain information. This type of communication is:
A project involved development of a high-speed, hard disk drive. As part of its testing, the hard disk was subjected to continuous operation at a high speed and an elevated temperature. At the end of the test, the hard disk was destroyed beyond use. The cost of such testing is usually classified as:
Identification of new risks, reassessment of old risks, and closing of outdated risks are part of the Monitor Risks process. How often should project risk reassessment be scheduled?
Which of the following is the process of communicating and working with stakeholders to meet their needs and expectations, address issues as they occur, and foster appropriate stakeholder involvement?
Rick has just been assigned as the project manager of a project to develop a complex product. The project is in the Define Scope phase. Which of these tools and techniques will Rick not use in this phase?
Teams go through various stages of development. According to the Tuckman ladder of development, the stage during which the least amount of work gets done is usually the:
Analysis of the scope performance resulted in a change request to the scope baseline. Change requests can include all the following except:
A senior project manager advises a first-time project manager that identifying risks is just one step. On a continuing basis, new risks need to be identified, and existing risks need to be analyzed and tracked, and their status reported. All this is done as part of what process?
A project manager has decided to use a decision tree to do a build or upgrade analysis. The build requires an investment of $200M. On the build decision branch, there is a 60 percent probability of strong demand (yielding a revenue of $400M) and a 40 percent probability of weak demand (yielding a revenue of $150M). What is the expected monetary value (EMV) of the build?
Quality metrics used during the Control Quality process are defined during which process?
In order to keep costs low, a project management team decided to apply statistical sampling while inspecting some of the work products. They decided to select 10 out of 50 engineering drawings for inspection. During which process should the sample be collected?
A project manager prepared a presentation that included data on the project's use of resources, improvements in staff efficiency, and the cost savings. These activities are part of what process?
A critical resource is on another project team. It is essential that you get his time for your project. You have contacted the resource's team manager several times but have received a poor response. What should you consider doing next?
Which of these is a valid negative risk response?
Which of these is accurate regarding risk management?
Anne is the project manager of a project. She has evaluated certain responses from prospective sellers and wants to select a contract model that will transfer risk to the seller. Which of the following should she select in order to achieve this?
Your project sponsor has asked you to present your project's high-level risk register to him in the next project update meeting. To create your high-level risk register, which of the following processes must be performed?
Which of these is an input to the Monitor Risks process?
Which of the following is true about risks?
During which stage of risk planning are risks prioritized based on their relative probability and impact?
If a project has a 60 percent chance of a $100,000 profit and a 40 percent chance of a $100,000 loss, the expected monetary value of the project is:
With high levels of uncertainty and unpredictability in a fast-paced and highly competitive global marketplace, where long-term scope is difficult to define, it is becoming even more important to have a __________ for effective adoption and tailoring of development practices to respond to the changing needs of the environment.
At the beginning of the project, a project manager realized the technical expertise of the team was limited, a risk to the project. Midway through the project, the project manager decided that this was no longer a risk and considered it outdated. As part of which process would he do the risk reassessment?
A government agency has awarded your company a massive software project. This project has an early completion incentive, and your company has a policy of paying a bonus to the project manager if such an incentive is awarded. However, this particular government agency has a reputation for being extremely difficult to work with; there is a great deal of bureaucracy within this agency, and stonewalling and hostility toward contractors are common. The project manager will need to have excellent political skills to lead this project successfully. You have been asked to lead the project because of your expertise with this type of project. However, you have never worked within such a highly charged and political environment. What should you do?
As part of a strategy to handle negative risk, a project manager decided to adopt less complex processes, conduct more tests, and choose a more stable supplier. What strategy would this be classified as?
Bill is the project manager of an external project for a customer. The project is expected to take about a year to complete. Six months into the project, the customer informs Bill that he or she needs to scrap the project. During which of the following processes would procedures be developed to handle early termination of a project?
During a discussion with the quality department, Dave, a project manager, was told that as applied to projects, the terms "prevention" and "inspection" are synonymous. However, his understanding of the terms is different. What would you comment on this situation?
Mark is managing an airport construction project. He is currently identifying his project stakeholders, and he has compiled a long list of stakeholders already. Managing expectations of every project stakeholder is not practical. What should he do in this situation?
While preparing a resource management plan, a project manager designated one of the senior programmers on the team to make decisions on whether the quality of deliverables met the project's documented standards. Which of the following aspects of a resource management plan does this address?
A project manager uses the precedence diagramming method (PDM) for constructing a project schedule network and creates a network diagram for the purpose. He decides to use the most common type of precedence relationship for all activities. Which of the following relationships would he use?
Sally, a project manager, was reconciling expenditure of funds with funding limits on the commitment of funds for the project. She found a large variance between the funding limits and planned expenditures. As a result, she decided to reschedule work to level out the rate of expenditures. This is:
A project manager used the services of a trained moderator during the Collect Requirements process. Which of the following is likely to have required the services of a trained moderator?
Jessica is managing an office refurbishment project. All the project stakeholders are identified and classified. The stakeholder engagement plan is also approved. Jessica is managing a project for the first time, and she is relying on the PMBOK guide as a reference to deliver an excellent project. Which of the following processes would provide guidance to Jessica regarding how to execute the approved stakeholder engagement plan?
Kelly is part of a project management office (PMO). Her office is responsible for the centralized and coordinated management of 18 projects. Each project has its own project manager. Which of the following will not typically be a responsibility of her PMO?
Which of the following statements accurately describes how the completion of project scope and the completion of product scope are measured?
Bill and Jake are two team members in a project. They do not get along well and are constantly involved in verbal conflicts. The project manager understands the characteristics of conflict and the conflict management process and tries to resolve the situation. Which of the following is not a correct statement?
The Identify Risks process involves determining which risks may impact a project. It is considered an iterative process. What is the frequency of the iteration?
A new project manager has just taken over a project that is 50 percent complete. As part of the hand-over process, the outgoing project manager provided the new project manager with a list of stakeholders that needed to be managed. The list had been compiled at the start of the project. Which of the following is true about stakeholders?
A project manager manages a distributed team with team members located in five countries. Due to time zone differences, he cannot find a time that is acceptable to all team members. Which conflict resolution technique is best suited for this situation?
Acceptance is a strategy adopted because it is not possible to eliminate all risks from a project. This strategy indicates that the project management team has decided not to change the project management plan to deal with a risk. What action does passive acceptance require?
A buyer and seller set the rates for junior engineers, senior engineers, architects, and other predefined roles. In what type of contract would this be applicable?
A project manager is estimating project costs and needs to decide whether the estimates will include direct costs only or include indirect costs, as well. In which of the following phases does this decision need to take place?
After conducting a bidder conference, you receive an email from one of the bidders requesting additional information. The information was neither included in your request for proposal, nor did anyone ask for it during the bidder conference. You realize the answer to this question is critical to understanding the scope of the project. If the answer is not communicated to bidders, they cannot size their teams accurately or estimate the total duration of the project. The answer also greatly affects cost. However, the answer contains some proprietary information that, if disclosed to a competitor, may reveal the future product strategy of your company. Such a disclosure could be disastrous for a major product launch you are planning next year. You decide to send the answer to all the bidders, but you realize one of the bidders is also working closely with one of your competitors on a similar project. What should you do?
During a project status meeting, a project manager presented sensitive information related to the project. However, this information was not intended to be available to the audience. Which of the following processes was done incorrectly, resulting in the project manager communicating sensitive information to the wrong audience?
A project manager created a resource histogram. On the histogram, some bars extended beyond the maximum available hours. What does this usually signify?
A project manager needs team members that report to a functional manager. What technique is the project manager most likely to use to obtain these resources?
Which of the following statements about project teams is incorrect?
You are just about to present your project's status to your company's executive team. Just as you are leaving your desk for the meeting, one of your resources hands you an updated report on the progress of a critical deliverable. As you are walking to the conference room, you review the report and notice there is an error in it. What do you do?
Sheila is the project manager of a website development project. After a detailed discussion with the project management team, she decides to create an informal, broadly framed quality management plan. What would your comment on this be?
A project manager was involved in preparation of the project charter for an external project. One of the inputs to the project charter was a statement of work (SOW). The SOW may have been received from the customer as part of any of the following except:
To define the logical relationship among dependencies accurately, a project manager is determining which ones require a lead or a lag. Which of the following correctly describes leads or lags?
Which of the following scenarios is likely to occur in a project?
Dina, the project manager of a hardware project, is performing a structured review of the procurement process. She would like to examine each document from the Plan Procurement Management process through the Control Procurements process to identify failures. What tool should Dina use?
A project manager estimated that a project would require 4375 personhours of effort. The project ended up using 6250 person-hours of effort. The difference between these two figures is a:
Erica is managing a kitchen tools manufacturing project, which is intended to produce modern cooking ovens. This project is hugely important for the company as well as for Erica`s career. Although the project scope statement was well-defined and requirements were gathered from stakeholders in the planning phase, many design change requests have come in from customers during project execution. Which of the following tasks must Erica perform to avoid scope creep caused by uncontrollable changes?
A project manager is considering risk in a project. When does risk come into play in a project?
The scope of work in a project could not be clearly defined. There was also a strong possibility that the scope would change during the course of the project. Which type of contract would suit this type of situation?
You are managing a project with a large multinational staff. Susan, one of the engineers, was originally asked to deliver her part of the work on October 19. Due to a change in the critical path, her deliverable will be needed two days sooner. However, as the new deadline is still two weeks away and she is ahead of schedule, you are confident her delivery will be on time. During a staff meeting, you learn from John, her functional manager, that Susan celebrates a religious holiday on October 17. However, he also tells you that Susan is not particularly religious; if pushed a bit and offered some incentive, she may forego celebrating this holiday and come to work. What should you do?
Jackie is the project manager of a large project. During the Determine Budget process, she identifies that contingency reserves need to be set up for unplanned but potentially necessary changes that could result from realized risks identified in the risk register. Which of the following is true about reserves?
You are meeting with your stakeholders to gather requirements for your project. You are well aware that requirements to be gathered include both product and project requirements. All the following tools can be used to gather, define, and analyze project requirements from stakeholders except:
A project manager is looking at a make-or-buy analysis as part of the Procurement Management process. What type of costs should the project manager consider for this analysis?
Which of the following is not an input to the Conduct Procurements process?
During the execution of a project, a large number of defects were discovered. The project manager ensured that the issues, defect resolution, and action item results were logged into a defects database. What would the defect database be considered a part of?
The WBS structure can be created in a number of forms except which of the following?
A project manager is currently ensuring that the stakeholders clearly understand the project goals, objectives, benefits, and risks. This relates to which of the following processes?
Joe has been managing a project for Exton Oil Corp. This project involves redesigning filling stations across the state. The redesign involves new gas pumps, security cameras, convenience stores, and use of environmentally friendly materials in the construction. While the redesigning work proceeds, Joe's design engineer suggests a secondary alarm system for gas pumps to alert the attendant in case of a spill. Although this suggestion is not in the project requirements, Joe is impressed with the engineer's recommendation. What should be the next step for Joe with regard to the engineer's suggestion?
Which of the following structures helps track project costs and can align with the organization's accounting system?
A first-time project manager is advised by an experienced project manager to plan for cost of quality. The first-time project manager is not sure which costs are included in the cost of quality. What would your advice be?
Miranda is an experienced project manager. As part of the Collect Requirements phase, she decides to use a group creativity technique. This technique is intended to enhance brainstorming with a voting process and can be used to rank the most useful ideas for further brainstorming or prioritization. Which of the following will she likely use?
In which of the following situations would it be better to avoid using Analogous Estimating?
During the Collect Requirements process, a group of people were discussing multiple alternatives. One of the individuals in the group made the decision for the group. This method of reaching a group decision is termed:
Which of the following processes will determine the correctness of deliverables?
All the monitoring and controlling processes and many of the executing processes can produce change requests as an output. Change requests may require corrective actions and preventive actions. Which of the following are normally affected by corrective and preventive actions?
You are a certified PMP, and the PMI has contacted you as part of an investigation it is conducting into allegations of improper conduct by your manager, who is also a PMP. A complaint has been filed stating your manager has received bribes related to a large procurement contract on another project. PMI has asked whether you could provide information regarding this situation. What should you do?
As part of the Estimate Costs process, a project manager obtained access to certain commercially available databases to get resource cost rate information. Such published commercial information is considered what type of input?
A project needed to monitor the technical performance of the project and capture data related to how many errors or defects had been identified and how many remained uncorrected. Which of the following techniques should the project use?
Which of the following is not an example of parametric estimating?
Nancy's project has a large number of key positive and negative stakeholders. To ensure the project's success, it is essential to manage the influential negative stakeholders closely. Do the key positive stakeholders need to be managed, too?
Which of the following is not an example of a work performance report?
A project charter that formally authorized a project was created. The project charter documented the initial requirements to satisfy stakeholders' needs and expectations. How often should the project charter be revised?
Which of the following techniques focuses on identifying non-value-added activities in a project?
Procurement statement of work (SOW) is a narrative description of the products or services to be delivered by the vendor. It usually references all the following except:
Nancy's project is in execution. Nancy is currently planning to execute the Manage Stakeholder Engagement process. She has gathered the project documents such as the issue log, the change log, the stakeholder register, the lessons learned register and the necessary organizational process assets. Which of the following is a key input to this process that is still missing from this list?
A project manager needed to shorten a project schedule and decided to employ crashing, a schedule compression technique. Which of the following activities would not be an example of crashing?
A project can be authorized by any of the following except:
You are working in a matrix project environment where functional managers have control over the resources. You are well aware that not acquiring the project team soon enough for your project could result in changes to the schedule, cost, and quality. To acquire the project team from functional managers, the best technique for you to use is:
A first-time project manager created a Work Breakdown Structure (WBS) where the deliverables had different levels of decomposition. What would your comment on this be?
Stanley's project is in execution. Stanley has a monthly stakeholder update meeting scheduled in which he presents the project's progress and current issues to the key stakeholders. During the last stakeholder update meeting, the stakeholders requested Stanley to provide bi-weekly project updates instead of monthly updates. The communication management plan has been broadly framed, and it does not restrict Stanley from doing bi-weekly updates. What should Stanley do?
Decision tree analysis is used to calculate the average outcome when the future includes scenarios that may or may not happen. What are a decision node's inputs and outputs?
Sensitivity analysis helps to determine which risks have the most potential impact on the project. A project manager prepared a display chart of sensitivity analysis for his project. The diagram contained a series of bars with the length of the bars corresponding to the risk impact on the project. The longer the bar, the greater was the risk presented. Such a chart is likely to be:
Which of the following is neither an input nor an output of the Direct and Manage Project Work process?
You have just taken over a project from another project manager about six months into a 12-month project. As you get to know the staff on the project, you become aware that five staff members are relatives of the previous project manager. What do you do?
A seller organization was executing work for a project under a contract. During the course of the project, a number of disputes arose over the scope and quality of the work. Which of the following is the preferred method of resolving these claims?
Which of the following is incorrect regarding a bidders conference?
The Actual Cost (AC) is the total cost actually incurred and recorded in accomplishing work performed for an activity or work breakdown structure component. What is the upper limit for the AC?
You are the project manager of a project executing work under a contract signed with a buyer organization. Just after the project has started, you notice that the buyer organization had made a mistake in the financial terms, and your organization stands to benefit considerably from this oversight. What should your stance be?
You are managing a project to design microprocessor control systems. The design work was estimated to be complete in 3.5 months with seven milestones. The sixth milestone is the prototype to be transferred to manufacturing. All milestones before prototyping have been completed ahead of schedule, with the sixth one being delayed for four months because the prototype was sent back several times due to conflicts between departments. You are now planning to hold a meeting to review the design specifications and handle conflicts between design and manufacturing. Who is at fault?
Why are the approved change requests input to the Direct and Manage Project Work process?
Sheila is a project manager who manages a global project. She has stakeholders located in various parts of the globe. Due to the nature of the project, she also has large volumes of information she needs to share with the recipients. What type of communication method should she prefer for this purpose?
Rina and Gimo are the senior developers in a website development project. They have argued about the best web design product to use in developing the new website. As the project manager, you use a forcing approach to make a decision and reduce the conflict. What is the main characteristic of this approach?
Rick, a project manager, is updating the status of his project. Based on the performance indices, he expects the project to finish a month earlier than the planned finish date. However, he expects the project to exceed the budgeted costs. What can you say about the schedule performance index (SPI) of the project?
A project team is currently focusing on Monitor Stakeholder Engagement process to reassess the project stakeholders' current engagement levels and to review the current stakeholder engagement strategy. Which of the following is an output of this process?
Variance Analysis is an important tool used in the Control Costs process. Which of the following statements regarding variances is correct?
You are working in Lab-X, a laboratory experimental project to research the effect of a virus on human male bodies. This project needs local government approval for carrying out tests on living people. However, the local authorities informed you were informed it would take at least three weeks to obtain authorization for such approval because of the documents involved in the review and approval process. You consider this a risk to the project and would like to send the paperwork in advance to reduce the approval time to one week. Which of the following describes the risk response techniques being employed in this scenario?
Stakeholder analysis is an important technique in the Identify Stakeholders process. One of the steps involved is to identify the potential impact of each stakeholder and classify him or her appropriately. Which of the following is not a valid stakeholder categorization method?
A key project in an organization has been ignored, due to high travel expenses associated with the movement of subject matter experts and other specialists across various project locations. Which of the following might allow such a project to be undertaken in a cost-efficient manner?
Your company took over the management of a project from another company that went out of business. To minimize disruptions related to the transition, your company hired a number of the employees from the other company. One of these employees has delivered a 300-page document a week ahead of schedule. However, while walking past his desk, you notice that his computer is displaying a document with the logo of his former employer. You suspect that some of his work may have been based on documentation that is the property of the other company. What do you do?
A project manager is performing a set of processes in the Initiating Process Group. Which of the following is likely to be part of the Initiating Process Group?
During the course of the project, the project management team developed a forecast for the estimate at completion (EAC) based on the project performance. Which of the following statements about EAC is correct?
Tracey is managing an ERP system implementation project. Which of the following tools can help her uncover a number of hidden process requirements during the Collect Requirements process?
Stakeholder identification is a continuous process. Which of the following statements about stakeholders is incorrect?
Which of the following is not an enterprise environmental factor influencing the Develop Project Management Plan process?
A project manager in a seller organization discovered that certain deliverables had been delivered to the buyer without undergoing proper testing. Recalling the deliverables will result in a cost overrun on the project. What should the project manager do in such a case?
The source selection criteria for all procurements in a project is developed during which of the following processes?
A project manager is estimating the project duration and finds that the only information available to him is a previous project that was quite different from the current one. However, some portions of the previous project were similar to the current one. Which of the following tools is the project manager likely to use to compare current project's activity durations with the similar previous activities?
During the Conduct Procurements process, the procuring organization found that there were significant differences in pricing by different sellers. What is the best course of action in such a scenario?
Dave, a first-time project manager, was of the opinion that all training activities need to be planned. He discussed this with an experienced project manager who understood that some training was necessarily unplanned. Which of the following are good candidates for unplanned training?
Which of the following is not an input to the Direct and Manage Project Work process?
While analyzing the risks in a project, a project manager updated the risk register with risk urgency assessment ratings. In which process would this be done?
A project manager is considering various classification methods to share information among project stakeholders. Which of the following correctly classifies the different methods used?
Which of the following roles in a project is most likely to be involved in negotiations on procurements during the Conduct Procurements phase?
Which of these is not an input to the Control Procurements process?
Which of the following is not a tool or technique of the Control Procurements process?
You have received a proposal for an RFP that was sent to vendors. One of the vendors has proposed doing the project for $12,500. The cost for the project is $10,000, and their profit will be $2,500. Which type of contract is most suitable if the type of work is predictable and the requirements are well-defined and not likely to change?
Your company requires that before you purchase any routers or switches for the data center you are building, you need to solicit quotes from three separate suppliers prior to submitting the purchase request to the finance department. This policy belongs to:
If you are working on a project with constantly changing scope, which type of contract would work best when hiring an outside vendor to complete a portion of the work?
Which of the following is accurate regarding agreements in Project Procurement Management?
What is the purpose of a bidder conference?
Apart from the difference in the overall governance approach used for the projects performed under the predictive and adaptive lifecycles, the project manager should also be familiar with:
Different types of contracts are appropriate for different types of purchases. Which of these is not one of the three broad categories of contracts?
You are building a mansion that will have copper roofs. The duration of the project will be approximately three years. You have built into the contract that, as the price of copper increases, your price increases as a percentage of the cost of the copper. However, all other costs are fixed. This is an example of what type of contract?
You are working for a large project organization with several project managers working on 15 projects. All project managers submit their status reports at month's end. One of your fellow project managers, Jane, has reported an error in the past two months. From discussions with one of her project's team members who is also working on one of your projects, you realize Jane is deliberately misreporting the project's status to inflate her performance for the annual performance appraisal next month. The monthend review meeting is in two days, and you are preparing your own presentation for it. What should you say about her status report?
You have presented a unique and verifiable product to your customers for their approval. Approval of this product may allow you to move on to your next phase. This unique and verifiable product is also known as:
You are a senior project manager working for RETAMART, a retail shopping network that sells various consumer products. As part of the expansion plan approved by the board of directors, you are assigned as a project manager for a new plant. Due to transportation problems, the project has experienced delays; the Schedule Performance Index (SPI) is at 0.6 and the Cost Performance Index (CPI) is at 0.7. However, you expect some improvements during the next few weeks, which may increase the SPI to 1.1 and the CPI to 0.9. Which of the following statements will be true if your anticipated changes materialize?
You are in the middle of a risk assessment meeting with key stakeholders, customers and project team leaders. While identifying and assessing risks, you realize that two key stakeholders are overemphasizing the impact of a risk. What is the best step to take to avoid unfairness or bias when assessing risks?
You are in the process of collecting and disseminating performance information to the stakeholders in the project. You want to predict the future performance of the project based on the current information. This performance information includes status reports, current status of risks, and summary of changes approved in the period. Which of the following methods will help you in predicting the future performance of the project?
There is a heavy demand for new houses in your city's expensive neighborhood. RECON, a construction company, has employed you as a project manager to assess the benefit of building new energy-efficient houses in that neighborhood, even though it takes more expensive technology to build such houses. You have started gathering data to perform a detailed payback analysis to submit a report to your management. Since the full financial impact of building energy-efficient houses is difficult to estimate, you would like to prepare a rough costbenefit analysis and include it with the report. Which of the following describes the effort you are undertaking in this scenario?
Jared is in the execution phase of a residential housing construction project. He has been informed of major scope changes from stakeholders in the middle of the project. These changes involve regulatory requirements from local authorities that may affect not only the scope but also the cost and duration of the project. What is the first step that Jared should take in considering these changes?
You are working on an information technology project as a project manager to develop a shopping website for your customers. Some key stakeholders in the project suggested scope changes to improve the website's look and feel. Your team has analyzed the impact of these changes and presented the analysis to the Change Control Board (CCB) for approval. What should be your next step if the CCB accepts all proposed changes?
Jane is worried about her project because many of her tasks are moving slowly, and two critical tasks may slip. She conducts a thorough resource analysis and finds out that there are five people who will be free next week. She would like to assign those people to finish her tasks early and prevent the project completion date from slipping. This is an example of:
Andrew is managing a construction project. He is using his communication, interpersonal and management skills to keep the key project stakeholders engaged with the project. Which of the following activities is not related to the Manage Stakeholder Engagement process?
You are working on a waste management project that, upon completion, will be turned over to the local municipality for steady-state operation. Parking of trucks and other vehicles has become a serious problem because no parking area was allotted to you on the main dumping site. As a result, your trucks are parked on nearby roadsides. One of the fleet supervisors informs you that close to the main site, there is a large tract of land a local charity owns. Many locals park their cars on this tract of land. What should you do?
In a textile manufacturing project, a team divided the project work into 35 work packages and assigned a few work packages to the design department for review. After the review, the manager of the design department requested that the team further divide the work packages into more manageable work components for estimating and scheduling resources. Which of the following techniques should the team use to satisfy the manager's request?
You are working as a project manager for MALTEX, an IT organization having a projectized organization structure. You have recently started managing a project that involves stakeholders from within and outside your organization. The stakeholders external to your organization are highly critical since the project negatively affects their interests. You are making serious efforts to gather their expectations and influence levels early in the project to ensure their voice is heard and proper communication needs can be planned in the project's future phases. The outcome of your effort can be documented in:
You have managed a federal highway construction project, which is intended to improve transportation between north and south regions of the country. In the execution phase, you received many complaints from stakeholders, including the highway transportation agency. At least half these complaints were regarding the quality of the micro texture of the road, and the nonconformance to the quality levels incorporated in the project quality management plan. So far, you have successfully fixed all the reported issues, but you are concerned by this recurrent event. What should you do to avoid future similar issues?
During a key stakeholders' update meeting, George's project was challenged. The project is currently in the executing phase. One of the key stakeholders claimed the project no longer makes any business sense. What must George do next?
To communicate with stakeholders on the resolved issues and the issues that are hard to resolve, you use an issue log in your project. Since you assign an owner for every issue and resolve it by working on it, your stakeholders actively support all your efforts in managing the project. This method of actively resolving issues and reducing risks to the project is known as:
You have been assigned as the project manager for a software development project. You are currently communicating with stakeholders and addressing their issues and expectations. Which of the following documents are inputs to this effort?
Changes in projects are inevitable. Therefore, project managers must develop or use a system to manage and control changes. There are four types of changes that need to be controlled in a project: Project changes, deliverable changes, process changes, and baseline changes. The impact of each of these changes must be evaluated, and approved or rejected changes must be communicated to all stakeholders, as and when required. Which of the following helps control these changes?
Two of your expert team members have been in a heated argument over the use of a new software product for your research project. Recently, you noticed that the argument, instead of increasing creativity, is causing conflict between the team members. To prevent the conflict from escalating, you want to resolve it by open dialogue and evaluating alternatives. All the following statements about conflict are false except:
As you examine a list of job candidates for your project, you find that your cousin is one of the three shortlisted candidates. You know that she was desperately looking for a job. After reviewing the three resumes, you will send them to the electronics engineer for a technical interview. From your review of these resumes, you see that all three shortlisted candidates have similar qualifications and experiences. What should you do?
The customer requests a change to the project that would increase the project risk. Which of the following should you do first?
Some tools or techniques can be used across various project processes to plan, execute, or control the characteristics of project elements. Which of the following is used as a tool in both the Control Quality and Plan Quality Management processes?
In an underground highway construction project, the project stakeholders have suggested many changes to the project scope. You had already defined the cost baseline in your project, and you would like to revisit the baseline to see how these changes might affect the overall cost of the project. You start an impact analysis to determine the impact and inform the concerned stakeholders of all approved changes and the corresponding costs. You perform these activities in which process?
Which of the following documents the formal or informal assessments of the project team's effectiveness?
You have recently joined a new company as a project manager. While reviewing the procurement plans for a project you will be taking over, you see that the company is considering using one of the most expensive manufacturers to provide certain equipment required for the project. At your previous employer, you had used a different supplier for the same equipment and had paid significantly less. Without telling your boss, you now call that supplier for a quote. Have you violated the rule of keeping proprietary information confidential?
Which of the following statements about the planned value, the earned value, the schedule variance, and the cost variance of a project is false?
You are working as a project manager for a wind-powered vehicle manufacturing project which is in its planning phase. You carefully gathered all your requirements from your key stakeholders and prepared a system requirements specification and project requirements specification. While presenting your specifications to the project team, an enthusiastic project team member started talking about the duration estimates for each activity. Which of the following statements indicates your response to your team member?
Rosanne is an experienced project manager working on a pharmaceutical project. This project involves two large vendors supplying chemical products with specific compositions for preparing drugs. While reviewing documents to see how a seller is performing, she notices the seller did not meet some of the contractual terms. Since it is a first-time violation, she would like to initiate a corrective action to bring the seller's performance in line with the statement of work. Which of the following are not outputs of Rosanne's effort?
The Project Charter defines the high level scope and objectives of a project. Which of the following is not a correct statement about inputs to the Project Charter?
Nancy's project is 80 percent complete. Which of the following project documents is least likely to be updated during the Monitor Stakeholder Engagement process performed at this stage?
Close Project or Phase is the process of completing and concluding all activities across all process groups to officially close the project. Which of the following activities is not performed during this process?
Which of the following activities fall under the planning process group but not under project schedule management?
James has been managing a hotel construction project on a busy street. He is in the process of estimating activity durations for building walls, and he calculates the most likely estimate as 15 days. If prefabricated material is used, it would take no more than 12 days to finish the work. The work may be delayed and could take up to 18 days if less experienced construction workers build the walls. What is the expected duration of building walls using the three-point estimate?
Rodney is in the process of preparing the project performance report for the team meeting. He is expecting many questions from his stakeholders on the budget and schedule. He calculates the following values: Budget at Completion (BAC) = $22,000, Earned Value (EV) = $13,000, Planned Value (PV) = $14,000, Actual cost (AC) = $15,000. What is the Estimate at Completion (EAC) for the project, if the work is performed at the budgeted rate?
You are reviewing the responses to an RFP your company issued. You realize that a key requirement was not included in the RFP. However, one of the bidders included that requirement in the response. What is the best course of action?
Many organizations favor fixed-price contracts because the buyer's risk is minimized by such contracts. However, to minimize the seller's risk, which of the following is crucial for a fixed price contract?
Which of the following is not an effective influencing technique?
The project manager of a long-term project to develop a new medical device waits until the later phase where the deliverables are more clearly defined before adding those details to the WBS. This is an example of:
Control charts are used to determine the stability of a process. Which of the following best describes the range of the control limits applied on a control chart?
You are just starting on a project as project manager. The project sponsor asks you for weekly status updates by email and monthly project status meetings to review the project's progress. These requirements are documented in the:
Cindy has been working in a manufacturing project as a project manager. This project is intended to produce high-quality semiconductors to use in computers. Since semiconductors are produced from silicon wafers, she contracted a company to provide silicon wafers to the project on an ongoing basis. For unknown reasons, the contractor provided low-quality wafers to the project, compromising the electrical performance of the semiconductors. Overwhelmed by complaints from the computer division, Cindy is now obligated to correct the manufacturing defects to avoid future liabilities. In this scenario, the costs Cindy incurred are:
As an independent consultant, you are working with a project manager of a spacecraft parts manufacturing project to ensure that the team complies with organizational quality policies and procedures. Since parts made in this project must be of high precision and accuracy, you are documenting shortcomings within the processes and procedures to improve the quality for customer acceptance. Which of the following best represents the project management activity you are doing?
You have been managing a research project to create genetically modified fruits using genetic engineering techniques. Since many legal issues are involved in this process, you created contingency allowances by using various quantitative analysis methods to account for cost uncertainty. You have just concluded a brainstorming session with your team in the execution phase to monitor risks that have developed in the project over the past few weeks and to establish new risk response plans. What should you do if you want to allocate more contingency reserves to account for new risks?
In a small office construction project, the following activities are scheduled in sequence. i) Digging and pouring footings: five days. ii) Working on the slab and pouring: three days. iii) Framing the floor: five days. iv) Wall framing: four days. v) Roof framing: six days. vi) Insulation and drywall: seven days. vii) Interior doors and trim: three days. viii) Hardware and fixtures: two days. What is the minimum time to complete the project if all activities are on a critical path except activity viii, and activity iii is delayed by one day?
During the execution of a project, the project manager discovers the project's stakeholder register is no longer accurate. What should the project manager do?
In a ship design project, a project manager is in the process of negotiating with a consulting company to ensure that the project receives certified and specialized consultants for creating the hull design. The project manager wants to make certain that the consultants will be able to work until their assignments are completed. He is using all his negotiation skills and interpersonal skills to get competent staff on time. Based on the scenario described above, the project manager is engaged in:
The Stakeholder Committee has a report that shows zero schedule variance. However, the first milestone in the project was missed, which will cause a delay in the project. Which of the following was not reported correctly?
The organization's safety and health policy, ethics policy, project policy, and quality policy can be used by a project to influence its success. All these policies are a part of:
Velvet is working for a chemical industry, and her management proposed two different projects to manufacture benzene for commercial use. After doing financial analysis, the financial advisor provided her with the following statistics about the projects: Project 1: 60 percent probability of success with a profit of $500,000 and 20 percent probability of failure with a loss of $200,000. Project 2: 30 percent probability of success with a profit of $300,000 and 30 percent probability of failure with a loss of $400,000. Based on the information above, Velvet should choose:
You are managing a highly complex drug manufacturing project, and your sponsor is highly motivated and influential. You are optimistic about the outcome of the project; however, you are unsure about the project approval requirements that measure the project's success. You would like to document the name of the person who signs off on the project and the criteria that constitute the project's success. Which of the following documents should you use first to incorporate project approval requirements?
Anthony is currently managing a bridge construction project. The project is in the execution phase. During the planning phase of the project, Anthony developed a comprehensive stakeholder engagement plan for the project. However, the frequency of plan review has not yet been defined. How often should Anthony review the stakeholder engagement plan?
Jim is managing a road network design project for a government agency. He is currently performing the Plan Stakeholder Engagement process for the project. Which of the following documents will provide the list of project stakeholders to Jim for this process?
Gordon is currently developing his project`s stakeholder engagement strategy. All enterprise environmental factors should be considered during this process. Which of the following enterprise environmental factors should receive particular attention during this process?
Daniel is the project manager for a factory construction project. Daniel has recently joined this organization and is not fully aware of the organization`s culture and structure. In order to manage his project stakeholders, Daniel has to understand them better. Which of the following can provide Daniel some historical information regarding stakeholder engagement on previous projects?
Project Stakeholder Management is focused on engaging project stakeholders with the project. What is the objective of keeping the project stakeholders engaged with the project?
Christine is managing a healthcare software development project. At a PMI conference, she met George, who is the project manager at a competing organization. George, a PMP, has managed many successful healthcare-related software development projects. If George shares his stakeholder management experience with Christine, will that be considered expert judgment?
Sandra is managing a new supersonic aircraft design project. This is a massive project, and its success is hugely important for her organization. For such mission-critical projects, which of the following is the most desirable engagement level for all major stakeholders?
Jennifer has recently been asked to manage an office refurbishment project. She finds out that the chief financial officer of the company is resisting the project. The chief financial officer is a key project stakeholder. What must Jennifer do first?
Greg's project is in the initiating stage. The sponsor of the project has asked Greg to present a list of the identified project stakeholders at the next project update meeting. The sponsor has also asked Greg to present the project stakeholders' current and desired engagement levels so they can brainstorm on the stakeholder engagement strategy. Which of the following is a presentation tool that can help Greg summarize all this information in a tabular format?
Diana is managing the development of a mobile phone application. Half the project work has been completed. Diana is currently reviewing her stakeholder engagement plan. She finds that some of the resisting stakeholders have now become supportive. How should Diana update her stakeholder engagement plan?
To assist with the selection of a supplier for a large procurement on your project, you have hired a consultant. The consultant has prepared an independent estimate to be used as a benchmark while reviewing bids on the RFP. The independent estimate is confidential and is not shared with any bidders. When the sealed bids are opened, you discover that only one supplier has submitted a quote lower than the independent estimate. All other quotes are 45 percent to 70 percent higher than the benchmark. While discussing this development with members of the project team, you learn a distant relative of the consultant owns the company with the lowest bids. What is the best course of action?
For many procurement items, the procuring organization can either prepare its own cost estimates or have an outside professional estimator prepare a cost estimate. This estimate serves as a:
Marvin has worked for a retail company as a project manager. With his positive thinking and strong managerial skills, he turned many potentially disastrous projects into successes. Because of his expertise, his employer's senior executives offered him a group project manager position for a newly started environmental project. However, Marvin learned that, in his newly assigned project, he might have to offer bribes to obtain government licenses. What should Marvin do in such a situation?
Which of the following is not an example of soft skills?
Julia is managing a complex industrial process reengineering project. She has identified all her key project stakeholders and has conducted individual interviews with them to identify other project stakeholders, as well. However, Julia is still not satisfied with her project's stakeholders list; she believes there may be more key external stakeholders missing from the list. What can help Julia in this situation?
You are in the final phase of a low-cost car manufacturing project. This project has successfully delivered a low-cost car that runs on batteries. However, to close this project and avoid auditing from government authorities, it must demonstrably comply with many administrative standards. Since your organization possesses experts who know closing procedures and standards, you want to use them to close this project. This effort is an instance of:
Nancy is engaged in the construction of three office buildings. Although the construction sites are in various places, she has managed each team efficiently to complete the work on time and within budget. Which of the following statements describes the effort Nancy is doing?
There are several communication methods used to share and distribute information to stakeholders, team members, and management. Which of the following communication methods is used when you notify the public about environmental effects from your project after implementation by posting reports on the project's website?
Lesley is managing a software development project for the World Climate Control Organization. Since her team members are dispersed across the globe, she would like to set up online conferences in the next two months to let everyone in her project know what is going on and what their roles are within the project. She wants to use these conferences as team development activities to learn and exchange information in the project. To schedule such activities, which of the following should she use to keep track of the availability of team members?
Bill is managing a healthcare software development project using stateof-the-art technology. Stakeholder management is crucial for the project's success. Stakeholder involvement and influence are significant. During which of the following project stages will stakeholder management be most challenging for Bill?
Which of the following statements about the management of risks in a project is incorrect?
A program management office (PMO) chose you to write a purchase order because of your expertise in business writing. You learned the PMO has already selected a seller for a software product and would like to award the procurement contract to the selected seller as a purchase order, which you must prepare. In this scenario, the PMO is administering:
Which of the following is not a Project Schedule Management process?
Shawn is in the execution phase of his project. He is getting unexpected requests from his stakeholders about the project's progress. Shawn can use all the following to respond to their requests except:
Tom is managing a software development project. The buyer of the product is an external entity. During the project's execution, Tom finds that a new operations manager was hired in the customer organization. The new manager is now a key stakeholder. Which of the following documents is least likely to be updated because of the addition of this new stakeholder?
Your drug manufacturing project requires the synthesis of many pharmaceutical chemicals to produce an active ingredient for a drug. You are managing a contractor to supply all these chemicals. Recent quality testing of the drugs raised concerns over the quality of the chemicals supplied by the contractor. Which of the following must be your first action to ensure that the contractor is meeting all contractual obligations?
A project manager is spending most of the project funding in the current phase of the project. The manager is also managing various resources in the project. What is the stakeholder influence on the project now compared to earlier phases?
Lucy has to brief her key project stakeholders on the recent approved changes to the project scope. Which of the following project documents will provide essential input to Lucy for preparing her presentation?
Organizations evaluate whether to buy products or make the items themselves. Which of the following is not a factor that influences makeor-buy decisions:
Analysis of project spending against project budget and calculation of the percentage complete of tasks currently underway are examples of:
Nancy can bid on two projects. Project A has a 50 percent return on investment while Project B has a 20 percent return on investment. Project A's scope of work is complex, and Nancy's organization does not have the necessary skills and experience to do this project. However, Project B's scope of work falls within the strengths of Nancy's organization. Which project must Nancy bid on?
Debbie, an IT project manager, is in the planning phase of a shopping website development project. A junior project manager, who has worked under her authority, started developing procedures for maintaining the integrity of cost and schedule performance baselines in the project. Where should the junior project manager store these procedures?
To reduce delivery delays and process downtime, your organization has recognized a need to replace their legacy manufacturing system with a modern software application. Your IT director anticipates a project to fulfill this business need; however, he warns that the new project's budget cannot exceed $75,000 due to shortages in the department budget. He also indicates that no additional staff will be allocated to this project other than the existing IT staff. If you become the project manager, you would document these initial project conditions as:
Which of the following is an output of the Create WBS process?
You have just received notice that the organization you have worked for as a project manager has gone bankrupt. All employees have 72 hours' notice of termination. What is the best course of action for the two projects you are managing?
Jen works as a project manager for the National Weather Agency. She is managing a project designed to assess the effect of climate change on northern mountains. The initial study established a two months' delay for the testing equipment to reach mountains due to road construction. However, a recent assessment has indicated a significantly shorter delay because of rapid progress in construction. To deal with the shorter delay, which of the following steps should Jen take next?
The method used in the Manage Quality process to identify the factors that may influence specific characteristics of a product under development is:
A team member in your project is constantly providing incomplete deliverables and not performing well. What should you do first?
Dana works for a federal agency that manages mission critical projects. As a project manager, she is responsible for all communication needs in her data center project, which has started recently. This project involves many stakeholders, customers, external vendors, and team members. Since conflicts are inevitable in such a massive project, she has decided to provide her project team the details of the issue escalation process, including the names of the chain of command to refer issues to that cannot be resolved at a lower level. Where must Dana document the escalation process?
Bill is managing a website development project. He has recently received feedback from one of the key project stakeholders. The feedback is positive overall, but it contains some recommendations. After analyzing the recommendations, Bill accepts them, gets them approved, and incorporates them into the project management plan. The recommendations were then implemented and the new ideas were found to be successful. What needs to be done with this feedback now?
The project you are working on has received an invoice from a vendor for US$17,500. However, your team believes the correct total due is US$15,300. When you notify the vendor, the vendor still insists on US$17,500. What is the best course of action now?
Project costs are estimated for all project activities and are aggregated to establish a cost baseline. Which of the following statements about the cost baseline is not true?
The RACI chart is an example of a responsibility assignment matrix (RAM). The letters R and C in "RACI" stand for:
_______________ is the authorized budget for the work scheduled to be completed on an activity or WBS component.
You are managing a project for a customer that has just gone bankrupt and is subject to liquidation proceedings. There are several outstanding invoices this customer has not paid to your company. What should you do now?
You are in a meeting with your senior manager, who is helping you to organize and manage a team of IT people from diverse backgrounds. While you are discussing the creativity and breakthrough performance your team is demonstrating now, your senior manager indicates that your team has moved from the storming to the performing stage. Which of the following describes the characteristics of the performing stage?
No matter how good you are in communicating, information distribution to stakeholders as planned is a challenging task. Many tools and techniques are used during the Manage Communications process except:
Mary is a project manager for an infrastructure upgrade project in a government agency. She realized recently that a critical scheduled task exceeded its deadline, and the stakeholders are aware of it. The resource manager has permitted Mary to use three more resources to work on and complete the delayed task. Although the three additional resources prove helpful, Mary is still concerned about the task because:
All the following are tools of the Control Schedule process except:
You are working with your customers on completing deliverables in your electronic parts manufacturing project. Since these parts will be exported to other countries, they will need more testing before your customers accept them. In this scenario, which of the following statements about the completed deliverables is correct?
You are managing a heavy equipment manufacturing project that involves many mechanical, electrical, and IT staff. Your team prepared a schedule network diagram using duration estimates with dependencies and constraints. Your team also calculated the critical path for the project using late and early values. Today, your project office has indicated to you that some of the resources you had planned for the project will be unavailable. To deal with this, you explore the possibility of modifying the schedule to account for limited resources. What is your best possible step in such a situation?
You are working as a project manager for a high-yield crop development project. Data from the weather agency shows an unfavorable weather pattern for the next few months. As a senior project manager, you want to assess the schedule's feasibility under adverse conditions and provide some insights to your team. That way, your team can prepare some reserves and plan risk responses if unfavorable conditions exist during execution. Which of the following techniques should you use to simulate risks and other sources of uncertainty to calculate possible schedule outcomes?
All the following activities are performed in the Close Project or Phase process except:
Your project team has recently identified a risk in the software development project and decided not to change the project management plan to deal with the risk. The risk response strategy that your team used in this scenario is an example of:
Which of the following is neither an input to nor an output of the Develop Project Charter process?
Which document defines how the project is to be executed, monitored, controlled, and closed?
You just completed the first phase of a multi-phase project. You have calculated earned value measurements and found that the current CPI is 0.79 and the current SPI is 0.98. Your next phase plan should focus first on which element of the project:
A project manager has just started planning his project. If he has only limited information about the project, he should use the following technique to estimate the duration for each activity using historical data from a similar project:
You are in the Validate Scope process of your electronic goods manufacturing project. While reviewing some products, you have noticed that the tolerance for one product is 0.01 percent less than what was listed in the requirements documentation. This deviation may not be a problem for the customers, and it may not impair the product's operation. What is your best immediate action in such a situation?
You have recently taken over a troubled automobile project, which has gone out of control. The project team missed many deadlines, and stakeholders were displeased with the project's progress. As an experienced project manager, your first priority is to align the schedule with the project plan. You would like to use what-if scenario analysis to see how various factors affected the project schedule so you can develop a plan to reduce the impact of adverse conditions on the project schedule in the future. What would be your next course of action be, once you determine the factors that created schedule overruns?
You just initiated a project to establish windmills in a developing country. To celebrate the initiation of the project, the customers arranged a party in which a key customer offered valuables to you and all your project team members with a request to complete the project sooner than the actual finish date. What should you do?
You overlooked a high-level risk in an insurance project and failed to document it in the project charter. If the risk shows up during the planning phase, what should be your response as a project manager?
You have recently started working as a project manager for a public school construction project. Your analysis shows that the cost estimate for the project seems to be unreasonable, and it could take at least 25 percent more funding to complete the project. What should you do if your sponsor wants to undertake the project with another project manager in case you refuse to accept it?
You have recently started working as a project manager for a health insurance portal development project. The project sponsor tells you that due to the critical nature of the project, the work must start immediately and complete in two weeks. Based on the instructions, you have started documenting significant constraints and assumptions to perform the project feasibility study. What should you do if you can prepare only the high-level feasibility study in the given time frame?
Danny is working as a project manager for a company that provides outsourcing services to banks. Recently, he sent a proposal to a local bank in response to a bid for a data warehouse project for which his company lacks expertise. Although his company lacks expertise, it has had a good working relationship with the bank in all its other projects. Which of the following statements is correct considering the proposal Danny submitted?
In a software development project, Debby, the project manager, completed development of a charter and identification of stakeholders. Debby has collected proprietary information from vendors during the planning process. What should Debby do when a functional manager from the same organization wants to see this information?
You are responsible for developing high-level risks, assumptions, and constraints for your project. You meet with experts in your organization and document various risks in the project. However, in reviewing historical data from a previous project, you notice a significant additional risk to your project, one that no one else is aware of. What should you do to continue the project?
You are using the one-on-one interview technique to gather high-level risks, assumptions, and constraints in an infrastructure development project to set up a bank. During the interview process, a key stakeholder tells you that the project might fail due to lack of support from local people. What should you do in this situation?
You have started a project to establish a railroad between two neighboring cities. The state agency that sponsors this project is heavily committed to completing this project on time and within budget. In support of the agency's commitment, you have completed the charter and started identifying stakeholders who would support the project. You would like to gather as many stakeholders as possible and move on to the planning phase. What should a project manager do while identifying stakeholders in a project?
During a three-year construction project, due to a shortage of resources, a project manager has decided to develop a partial work breakdown structure (WBS) in the beginning of the planning phase. The WBS will be expanded as more information becomes known in the near term. What should the project manager do if a key resource criticizes his or her decision to develop the partial WBS?
You are using parametric estimating techniques to estimate costs for each activity and the total budget in your project. However, a project manager colleague tells you to bump up each estimate by 20 percent to account for any unknown risks, and then submit that as a total budget to the customers. What should you do?
Two of your team members are constantly arguing with each other about work assignments. Due to their attitude, the project is delayed, and pressure is building on other team members. What should you do?
In an IT project, after several brainstorming sessions with customers, Kurt established various project deliverables. Two weeks later, while reviewing the plan, Kurt identifies two similar deliverables and decides to merge them into a single deliverable. What should Kurt do next?
The management of a retail business unit has just assigned Mario to compare multiple projects and select the best project that will produce the most value for the unit. Although Mario has worked as a project manager for a long time, he has only a limited understanding of project selection methods. What should be the first course of action from Mario in this scenario?
A company hires you to work as a project manager in a foreign country. You discover that you must pay kickbacks to the officials there to get licenses for your project. What should you do?
Jack is currently identifying stakeholders in his automobile project. While talking to his senior manager, Jack learns that one of the key stakeholders, whom he identified in his project, is so influential that he or she cancelled an IT project before it moved into the planning phase. What should Jack do with such influential stakeholders?
While conducting interviews for a project manager position, you notice that your classmate is one of the prospective candidates. What should you do immediately?
One of your team leaders informs you that a team member criticizes him constantly about the allocation of tasks. The team leader also asserts that this team member is also responsible for the delay of many tasks, leading to delays in the project schedule. What action should you take as a project manager?
What should you do as a senior project manager if the PMP certification claimed by a recently recruited project manager does not appear in the PMI website?
You have recently taken over a project from a PMP-certified project manager who was removed from the project due to incompetence and lack of skills. When you happen to meet him outside your building, he starts rebuking you for taking his project. He even goes so far as to suggest that your religion played a part in your selection by the management. What should you do first?
In a manufacturing project, you have requested bids to procure stainlesssteel products. However, your sponsor insists that you conduct bidder conferences before selecting sellers. What mandatory standard in the PMI Code of Ethics and Professional Conduct is met by conducting bidder conferences?
In a software development project, you are having joint application development (JAD) sessions to collect product requirements from stakeholders. Which of the following mandatory standards in the PMI Code of Ethics and Professional Conduct is met by having JAD sessions while gathering requirements?
A functional manager in your organization has recently filed a complaint against a junior project manager regarding his project management certification. The functional manager claims that the PMP certification claimed by the junior project manager is invalid and needs to be checked. What should be your response as a senior project manager?
While conducting a brainstorming session to identify stakeholders, a process manager disagrees with you on a decision you made regarding the influence and impact of each stakeholder on the project. He even makes some comments against you in front of other stakeholders. As a senior project manager, what should be your immediate response?
You have found you do not yet have an accurate estimate of the number and skill levels of resources needed for the scheduled activity Build Racks for Data Center. You need this estimate for presentation to your Human Resources department later in the week. You have decided to decompose the Build Racks for Data Center activity into smaller components such as take equipment out of box, review equipment for completeness, build frame, and install rails. Then you plan to estimate the resources for each smaller component and combine those estimates into an aggregate. This is an example of:
You are a senior project management practitioner. You have been given a chemical manufacturing project that could potentially contaminate the groundwater in the neighboring residential community. After detailed analysis, you learn that the impact could be severe in the long run. If the sponsor of the project wants to complete this project as soon as possible, you must:
You are working on a software development project in which specialized resources are required to perform some tasks. You estimate these resources are necessary during the project's executing phase. However, your estimation fails to account for these resources are available for only limited hours in the executing phase. What should you do to make schedule changes to deal with the limited availability?
A project manager has completed identification of stakeholders and has started planning for a flow instruments installation project in a hospital. While developing the project management plan, a team member states that a stakeholder in the X-ray department is missing from the stakeholder list. Which of the following would be the best response from the project manager?
While using facilitated sessions to gather high-level business requirements for a software development project, one of your customers proposes a requirement that may not be technologically possible to meet. If the customer insists on the requirement, what should you do first?
You have just started leading a World Bank healthcare development project in a developing country in which it is customary to offer lunch when a project is initiated. Although your team members are willing to accept the offer, you decide to refuse the offer since you know the PMI's Code of Ethics and Professional Conduct does not allow you to accept gifts. Which of the following statements about your decision is correct?
You work for a software development company that has followed the waterfall development model for more than 20 years. Lately, a number of customers have complained that your company is taking too long to complete its projects. You attended a class on agile development methods and believe that if the company used the agile approach, it could provide products to clients in a shorter time period. However, it would be a major culture change to switch from the waterfall methodology to the agile approach and to train staff members in this new approach. You mentioned this idea to the director of the PMO, and although she liked the idea, she would need approval from the company's portfolio review board to move forward with it. She suggested that you document this idea in a-
You are managing a large project with 20 key internal stakeholders, eight contractors, and six team leaders. You must devote attention to effective integrated change control. This means you are concerned primarily with-
You plan to hold a series of meetings as you execute the project plan. While different attendees will attend each meeting, a best practice to follow is to:
You are the project manager in charge of developing a new shipping container for Globus Ocean Transport, which needs to withstand winds of 90 knots and swells of 30 meters. In determining the dimension of the container and the materials to be used in its fabrication, you convene a group of knowledgeable professionals to gather initial requirements, which will be included in the-
You have assembled a core team to develop the project management plan for the next generation of fatigue fighting drugs. The science is complex, and the extended team of researchers, clinicians, and patients for trials exceeds 500 people. In your plan you will be including a number of components, one of which is the life cycle. Of the following which is the most appropriate life cycle to select
When you established the change control board for your avionics project, you established specific procedures to govern its operation. The procedures require all approved changes to baselines to be reflected in the-
You are beginning a new project staffed with a virtual team located across five countries. To help avoid conflict in work priorities among your team members and their functional managers, you ask the project sponsor to issue a-
The benefit of Manage Project Knowledge is to-
Interpersonal and team skills are used throughout project management. Your company is embarking on a project to completely eliminate defects in its products. You are the project manager for this project, and you are developing your project charter. To assist you, which of the following interpersonal and team skills do you plan to use-
The Direct and Manage Project Work process truly is important in project management. It affects many other key processes and uses inputs from others. Working with your team at its kickoff meeting, you explain the key benefit of this process is to-
You are managing a project in an organization characterized by rigid rules and policies and strict supervisory controls. Your project, sponsored by your CEO who is new to the company, is to make the organization less bureaucratic and more participative. You are developing your project management plan. Given the organization as it now is set up, as you prepare your plan, you can use which of the following organizational process assets-
You are fairly new to managing a project but have been a team member for many years. You are pleased you were selected to manage your company's 2022 model line of hybrid vehicles. You are now planning your project and have been preparing the subsidiary plans as well. You realize some project documents also are required to help manage your project. An example of one that you believe will be especial helpful is the-
You work for a telecommunications company, and when developing a project management plan for a new project, you found that you must tailor some company processes because the product is so different than those products typically produced by your company. Even so, you will consider as you prepare your project management plan-
You are implementing a project management methodology for your company that requires you to establish a change control board. Which one of the following statements best describes a change control board?
An automated tool, project records, performance indicators, data bases, and financials are examples of items in-
You realize that projects represent change, and on your projects, you always seem to have a number of change requests to consider. In your current project to manage the safety of the nation's cheese products and the testing methods used, you decided to prepare a formal change management plan. An often-overlooked type of change request is-
You have been directed to establish a change control system for your company, but you must convince your colleagues to use it. To be effective, the change control system must include-
You are working on the next generation of software for mobile phones for your telecommunications company. While time to market is critical, you know from your work on other projects that management reviews can be helpful and plan to use them on your project. You are documenting them as part of your-
Your cost control specialist has developed a budget plan using cost / benefit analysis for your project to add a second surgical center to the Children's Hospital. As you analyze cash flow requirements, you notice that cash flow activity is high. Your business case, which was approved, showed the need for financial resources would be great so you decided to prepare a benefit realization plan for your executives, team, and stakeholders. The purpose of this plan in conjunction with the project management plan is to-
You are project manager for a systems integration effort and need to procure the hardware and software components from external sources. Your project is complex as you will have over 20 contractors involved. Your project team is experienced, and you will be working to continually demonstrate the project's benefits to the management team. You have found many do not read the detailed plans you prepare so you decided to-
Because your project is slated to last five years, you believe rolling wave planning is appropriate. It provides information about the work to be done-
Variance analysis is used throughout project management and is a useful tool and technique. Assume you decide to use it as you make decisions as to how to best monitor and control the work on your project. It is helpful because-
You are managing a project to introduce a new product to the marketplace that is expected to have a very long life. In this situation, the concept of being temporary, which is part of the definition of a project,-
When closing a project, it is a best practice to-
Many components of the project management plan are outputs of other processes. However, some other components are equally important and are prepared as part of the Develop Project Management Plan process. An example is the-
You are responsible for a project management training curriculum that is offered throughout the organization. In this situation, your intangible deliverables are-
Working on your project management training curricula project, you decided it would be beneficial to you to become an active member of the Project Management Institute as part of the objectives of your project is to ensure it is aligned with PMI(R)'s best practices. To complement PMI(R)'s Work Breakdown Structure Practice Standard, you learned PMI(R) was requesting volunteers to participate in development of a similar standard on the Scope Statement. You volunteered, and now the Standard is issued. This is an example of:
Ideally, a project manager should be selected and assigned at which point in the project life cycle?
Assume your seven-year project to build the next generation of airplanes that can fly anywhere in the world for 24 hours is complete. You now are closing the program. You have decided to use which of the following tools and techniques to assist you in this final process-
As you are working on your telecommunications project, even though you are using agile methods, you realize you are preparing an extensive amount of data and information. You regularly share data with your project team. Your last team meeting focused on the number of change requests and also the start and finish dates of activities in your schedule. They are examples of-
Assume your program management plan has been approved, and you are now managing the work to be done to complete the project successfully. You realize your work is affected by the area in which you work, which is in pork safety and is affected by possible new regulations and tariffs in your country, which may limit your possible exports. You therefore are using your-
Assume your project to redesign your headquarters so it has state-of-the-art technology is complete, and you are in the closing phase. You decided to hold some meetings in order to-
You are a personnel management specialist recently assigned to a project team working on a team-based reward and recognition system. The other team members also work in the human resources department. The project charter should be issued by-
Your project is proceeding according to schedule. You have just learned that a new regulatory requirement will cause a change in one of the project's performance specifications. This change request has been approved. You have had a number of change requests, such as this one, plus issues to handle. A key difference between the two is that-
Different types of project processes are used on projects. Some processes are used once at predetermined times, some are performed periodically on the project, and others are performed continuously. An example of the latter is-
Assume your company is a leader in the market in production of cereal products. It has been in this market for over 50 years. You are the project manager for a new product that is a derivative from the company's core product. As you determine a life cycle for this project, you believe you should follow one that is-
Assume your project consisted of producing a new generation of cell phones that could access the internet from anyplace at any time. However, you learned today that your company acquired a competitor, and the competitor has a comparable product that is being manufactured. You were then told to terminate your project. In this situation you should-
On your project you want to avoid bureaucracy, so you adopt an informal approach to change control. The main problem with this approach is-
Your project to establish a knowledge transfer process and a knowledge repository is complete. You performed a number of pilot tests, and people in your company are pleased with the results. You are receiving a promotion to become the company's first Chief Knowledge Officer once the project officially is closed. In doing so, you are following the company's activities for administrative closure, one of which is-
All projects involve some extent of change because they involve work that is unique in some fashion. Therefore, it is important that a project management plan includes a-
Progressive elaboration of product characteristics on your project must be coordinated carefully with the-
You are examining multiple scope change requests on a project you were asked to take over because the previous project manager decided to resign. To assess the degree to which the project scope will change, you need to compare the requests to which project document?
You and your project team recognize the importance of project scope management to a project's overall success; therefore, you include only the work required for successful completion of the project. The first step in the Project Scope Management process is to-
An example of an organizational process asset that could affect how project scope is to be managed is-
You are managing a complex project for a new method of heating and air conditioning in vehicles. You will use both solar and wind technologies in this project to reduce energy costs. Therefore, you must ensure that the work of your project will result in delivering the project's specified scope, which means that you should measure completion of the product scope against the-
A key tool and technique used in Define Scope is-
Each organization is unique and has different ways to define its products, services, and results. You are working on your project to develop a new product using disruptive technologies to reduce traffic in your city. You are working to define your project's scope, and you have a large team plus interested stakeholders. A tool and technique that may be helpful is-
Assume you and your team prepared your project's scope statement, and it was approved by your sponsor and your governance committee. However, you also need to update some project documents as an output of the Define Scope process. One example is-
The document to evaluate whether requests for changes or additional work are contained within or outside the project's exclusion is provided by the-
Rather than use a WBS, your team developed a bill of materials to define the project's work components. A customer review of this document uncovered that a scope change was needed, because a deliverable had not been defined, and it led to the need to write a change request. This is an example of a change request that is required because it is the result of-
Collecting requirements is critical in project scope management, but all the requirements may not be used as the project scope is defined. Assume once you defined your project's scope, you then began to develop your work breakdown structure. As you worked on it, you found it useful to review the-
Assume you are preparing the scope statement for your project. In it, you are describing the project's deliverables, assumptions, and constraints. You also want to include-
Assume you are working to collect the requirements for your project. As you do so, you realize your project's success is due to-
You want to structure your project so that each project team member has a discrete work package to perform. The work package is a-
Quality function deployment is one approach for collecting requirements. Assume that you have studied the work of numerous quality experts, such as Deming, Juran, and Crosby, and your organization has a policy that states the importance of quality as the key constraint of all project constraints. You and your team have decided to use quality function deployment on your new project to manufacture turbines that use alternative fuels. The first step you should use is to-
On the WBS, you have decided to structure it by phases of your project. In this approach-
Change is inevitable on projects. The number of interested stakeholders, technology, the difficulty in obtaining resources, and the difficulty in motivating people to be on the team are just a few changes that may occur on projects. Projects also cause changes in the development of a new product, service, or result. The project manager wants to minimize changes on the project. Uncontrolled changes are often referred to as-
You are going to be using a number of contractors on your project to produce a car that uses natural gas as its fuel supply since your country has an abundance of it available. You are working on preparing your WBS for this project as you have completed the scope statement. In your WBS, the most effective approach to use is to-
In Control Scope it is important to determine the cause of any unacceptable variance relative to the scope baseline. This can be done through-
To assist your software development team in collecting requirements from potential users and to ensure that agreement about the stakeholders' needs exists early in the project, you decide to use an interpersonal and team skill. Numerous techniques are available, but you and your team choose a voting process to rank the most useful ideas for further prioritization. This approach is known as-
You have been appointed project manager for a new project in your organization and must prepare a project management plan. You decide to prepare a WBS to show the magnitude and complexity of the work involved. No WBS templates are available to help you. To prepare the WBS, your first step should be to-
You want to avoid scope creep on your project and are working hard to do so. Your sponsor has asked for regular reports as to how the project is performing according to the scope baseline. You decide to use-
You are leading a project team to identify potential new products for your organization. One idea was rejected by management because it would not fit with the organization's core competencies. You now have a project to make your organization one that is comfortable with using disruptive technologies, which was approved. Now you are working on your scope statement and as you do so, it is helpful to consider-
Validate scope-
Although you and your team are actively working to control the scope of your project, change is inevitable on projects. You have had some change requests from your sponsor, team members, and other stakeholders. You have processed these change requests. This means you also need to update which of the following documents?
One approach that can be used to detect the impact of any change from the scope baseline on the project objectives is-
Throughout the project, you are focusing on the Monitoring and Controlling process, which include Control Scope. You have processed some change requests and now also need to update some parts of the project management plan, one of which is the-
Validate Scope is performed throughout the project. However, there are several outputs from the Validate Scope process, one of which is-
Your project is now under way, and you are working with your team to prepare your requirements management plan. One component of this plan you want to include is-
You are the project manager on a systems engineering project designed to last six years and to develop the next-generation corvette for use in military operations. You and your team recognize that requirements may change as new technologies, especially in sonar systems, are developed. You are concerned that these new technologies may lead to changes in the scope of your product, which then will affect the scope of your project. Therefore to help you, you should prepare a-
Your customer signed off on the requirements document and scope statement of your video game project last month. Today she stated she would like to make it an interactive game that can be played on a television, smart phone. and on a computer. This represents a requested scope change that at a minimum-
While the Validate Scope process has some similarities with the Control Quality process, a key benefit of Validate Scope is-
Modifications may be needed to the WBS and WBS dictionary because of approved change requests, which shows that-
You and your team are documenting requirements on your project to control fatigue as people need to work more hours to keep up with the competition. You decided to set up categories for the requirements on your project. Temporary capabilities are an example of-
You are working to collect the requirements for your project to eliminate the possibility of later scope creep. You have a variety of tools and techniques you can use. Assume you want to obtain early feedback on the requirements, and you have decided the most appropriate tool and technique is-
You have prepared the WBS for your project. However, for your project, your company decided to try an agile approach. Many feel you will not need to develop a WBS and a lot of other documents in your project management methodology. However, with agile the difference is-
The project scope statement is important in scope control because it-
The product scope description is documented as part of the project's scope statement. It is important to include it because it-
How is a context diagram used?
You are establishing a PMO that will have a project management information system that will be an online repository of all program dat
What is the duration of the critical path in this network?
What is the float for Activity G?
If a project planner imposes a finish time of 14 on the project with no change in the start date or activity durations, what is the total float of Activity E?
If the imposed finish time in question 3 above is removed and reset to 16 and the duration of Activity H is changed to 3, what is the late finish for Activity G?
Your company, which operates one of the region's largest chemical processing plants, has been convicted of illegally dumping toxic substances into the local river. The court has mandated that the required cleanup activities be completed by February 15. This date is an example of-
You are managing a construction project for a new city water system. The contract requires you to use special titanium piping equipment that is guaranteed not to corrode. The titanium pipe must be resting in the ground a total of 10 days before connectors can be installed. In this example, the 10-day period is defined as-
You are working to control your schedule. You have a number of tools and techniques you can use and may need to use several of them for effectiveness. You decide you want to track work remaining to be done so you will use-
You are planning to conduct the team-building portion of your new project management training curriculum out-of-doors in the local park. You are limited to scheduling the course at certain times of the year, and the best time for the course to begin is mid-July. You are using the precedence diagramming method for your schedule. In it, you can show relationships between tasks in four ways, and the most common is-
Project schedule development is an iterative process. If the start and finish dates are not realistic, the project probably will not finish as planned. You are working with your team to define how to monitor any schedule changes. You documented your decisions in which of the following?
If, when developing your project schedule, you want to define a distribution of probable results for each schedule activity and use that distribution to calculate another distribution of probable results for the total project, the most common technique to use is-
Your lead engineer estimates that a work package will most likely require 50 weeks to complete. It could be completed in 40 weeks if all goes well, but it could take 180 weeks in the worst case. What is the expected duration of the work package?
Your customer wants the project to be completed six months earlier than planned. You believe you can meet this target by overlapping project activities. The approach you plan to use is known as-
Activity A has a duration of three days and begins on the morning of Monday the 4th. The successor activity, B, has a finish-to-start relationship with A. The finish-to-start relationship has three days of lag, and activity B has a duration of four days. Sunday is a non-workday. Such data can help to determine-
You can use various estimating approaches to determine activity durations. When you have a limited amount of information available about your project, especially when in the early phases, the best approach to use is-
"I cannot test the software until I code the software." This expression describes which of the following dependencies?
Working with your team to provide the basis for measuring and reporting schedule progress, you agree to consider the-
Your project schedule was approved. Management has now mandated that the project be completed as soon as possible. However, you do not think it is possible given resource constraints. In order to convince your management of your need for additional resources, you decide to use-
Review the following network diagram and table. Of the various activities, which ones would you crash and in what order? B D 6 2 A G 4 6 C E 2 7 F Letter = activity 12 Number = duration Time required, weeks Cost $ Crashing cost Activity Normal Crash Normal Crash per weeks, $ A 4 2 10,000 14,000 2000 B 6 5 30,000 42,500 12,500 C 2 1 8000 9500 1500 D 2 1 12,000 18,000 6000 E 7 5 40,000 52,000 6000 F 12 3 20,000 29,000 3000 G 6 2 5000 30,000 6000
You are working on a project to remodel a home, and you and your team decided you should first finish the plumbing work and then do the electrical work. In this example, this is an example of a-
Decomposition is a technique used for both WBS development and activity definition. However, in Define Activities, decomposition-
When sequencing project activities in the schedule, you should ensure-
A schedule performance index of less than 1.0 indicates that the-
Assume you are working to sequence the activities in your schedule. You have focused on the need for predecessors and successors for your tasks. Now, you have finished, and you realize-
To meet regulatory requirements, you need to crash your project schedule. Your first step is to compute-
A key input to the Define Activities process is the-
Unlike bar charts, milestone charts show-
Project managers should pay attention to critical and subcritical activities when evaluating project time performance. One way to do this is to analyze 10 subcritical paths in order of ascending float. This approach is part of-
An activity has an early start date of the 10th and a late start date of the 19th. The activity has a duration of four days. There are no non-workdays. From the information given, what can be concluded about the activity?
In project development, schedule information, such as who will perform the work, where the work will be performed, activity type, and WBS classification, are examples of-
There are purposes and benefits in the Control Schedule process. Its benefit is-
It is important to use the critical path method in Control Schedule because-
Several types of float are found in project networks. Float that is used by a particular activity and does NOT affect the float in later activities is called-
Assume your organization has decided to use agile for most of it projects. You are managing a project using agile and are working to develop your schedule. In doing so, you are using agile release planning. Your schedule is based on the-
You are managing a new technology project designed to improve the removal of hazardous waste from your city. You are in the planning phase of this project and have prepared your network diagram. Your next step is to-
Assume you are working to Estimate Activity Durations. You need to determine the amount of work to complete each activity and the resources required. As you work to do so, you should consider-
You are managing a project that will use a virtual team with team members on three different continents. Your company is looking to use the virtual team to provide a lower cost product by using resources in countries that have a favorable exchange rate to that of your country. To assist in this process as you estimate resource requirements, it is helpful to consider-
Activity A has a pessimistic (P) estimate of 36 days, a most likely (ML) estimate of 21 days, and an optimistic (O) estimate of 6 days. What is the probability that activity A will be completed in 16 to 26 days?
You are managing a project to redesign a retail store layout to improve customer throughput and efficiency. Much project work must be done on site and will require the active participation of store employees who are lifelong members of a powerful union with a reputation for labor unrest. One important component of your schedule must be-
Assume you are working on a on a project using lean manufacturing. Now you are preparing your schedule. You feel your tasks may be relatively similar in size and scope. You should consider-
The reason that the schedule performance index (SPI) is shown as a ratio is to-
According to earned value analysis, the SV and status of the project described above is-
What is the CPI for this project, and what does it tell us about cost performance thus far?
The CV for this project is-
What is the EAC for this project, and what does it represent?
You have now prepared your cost management plan so now you are preparing your project's cost estimate. You decided to use analogous estimating. Analogous estimating-
While cost estimates are the main output of the Estimate Costs process, not to be overlooked is-
You must consider direct costs, indirect costs, overhead costs, and general and administrative costs during cost estimating. An example of an indirect cost is-
If the cost variance is the same as the schedule variance and both numbers are greater than zero, then-
You are responsible for preparing a cost estimate for a large World Bank project. You decide to prepare a bottom-up estimate because your estimate needs to be as accurate as possible. Your first step is to-
Management has grown weary of the many surprises, mostly negative, that occur on your projects. In an effort to provide stakeholders with an effective performance metric, you will use the to-complete performance index (TCPI). Its purpose is to-
If operations on a work package were estimated to cost $1,500 and finish today but, instead, have cost $1,350 and are only two-thirds complete, the cost variance is-
When you review cost performance data on your project, different responses will be required depending on the degree of variance or control thresholds from the baseline. For example, a variance of 10 percent might not require immediate action, whereas a variance of 100 percent will require investigation. A description of how you plan to manage cost variances should be included in the-
As of the fourth month on the Acme project, cumulative planned expenditures were $100,000. Actual expenditures totaled $120,000. How is the Acme project doing?
On your project, you need to assign costs to the time period in which they are incurred. To do this, you should-
You have a number of costs to track and manage because your project is technically very complex. They include direct costs and indirect (overhead) costs. You have found that managing overhead costs is particularly difficult because they-
If you want to calculate the ETC based on the assumption that work is proceeding as planned, the remaining work can be calculated by which of the following formulas?
You receive a frantic phone call from your vice president who says she is going to meet with a prospective client in 15 minutes to discuss a large and complex project. She asks you how much the project will cost. You quickly think of some similar past projects, factor in a few unknowns, and give her a number. You provided which of the following type of estimate-
Your approved cost baseline has changed because of a major scope change on your project. Your next step should be to-
You have set aside a certain portion of your project for contingency and management reserves. You want to use these reserves to cover the costs of risk responses or other contingencies. On your project, you have had some opportunities that resulted, which means you should-
There are many useful EVM metrics, but the most critical is-
The approved, integrated scope-schedule-cost plan for project work is-
It is expensive to lease office space in cities around the world. Office space can cost approximately USD $150 per square foot in Tampa, Florid
Your project manager has requested that you provide him with a forecast of project costs for the next 12 months. He needs this information to determine if the budget should be increased or decreased on this major construction project. In addition to the usual information sources, which of the following should you also consider?
There are a number of different earned value management rules of performance measurement that can be established as part of the cost management plan. One of them is the-
Which of the following calculations CANNOT be used to determine EAC?
Typically, the statement "no one likes to estimate, because they know their estimate will be proven incorrect" is true. However, you have been given the challenge of estimating the costs for your nuclear reactor project. You are considering a variety of items as you incorporate the cost of financing, which is in the-
By reviewing cumulative cost curves, the project manager can monitor-
Control accounts-
Assume you are holding performance review meetings on your project to assess schedule activity and work packages over-running or under-running the budget and to determine any estimated funds needed to complete work in progress. You also are using earned value. You are preparing reports for your stakeholders as they want regular cost forecasts. This means they are interested in-
Overall cost estimates must be allocated to individual activities to establish the cost performance baseline. In an ideal situation, a project manager would prefer to prepare estimates-
One way to engage team members to improve estimate accuracy is to-
Assume you have used reserve analysis as a tool and technique in Control Costs. However, during your project risk identification and subsequent analysis of the identified risks was ongoing. In fact you had a risk expert on your team. This means you may need to-
Increased attention to return on investment (ROI) now requires you to re-estimate the costs for your project. When you looked at how costs were first estimated, you realized an order-of-magnitude estimate was prepared, which was never refined. Therefore, now you are estimating costs from the beginning. As you are preparing a new smart TV along with an automated home as the products of your project, you realize market conditions should be reviewed because-
A revised cost baseline may be required in cost control when-
As project manager, you identified a number of acceptable tolerances as part of your earned value management system. During execution, some "unacceptable" variances occurred. After each "unacceptable" variance occurred, a best practice is to-
Assume that the project cost estimates have been prepared for each activity and the basis of these estimates has been determined. Now, as the project manager for your nutrition awareness program in your hospital, you are preparing your budget. Because you have estimates for more than 1,200 separate activities, you have decided to first-
Assume you are using earned value on your project, and as of today, your cumulative CPI is below the baseline. This means-
Assume it has become obvious on your project that the budget at completion is no longer viable. This means as the project manager, you should-
Assume that your actual costs are $800; your planned value is $1,200; and your earned value is $1,000. Based on these data, what can be determined regarding your schedule variance?
The CPI on your project is 0.84. This means that you should-
Quality is very important to your company. Each project has a quality statement that is consistent with the organization's vision and mission. In both internal and external Manage Quality, the broader definition of quality assurance, is provided on projects to-
Benchmarking is a technique used in-
In quality management, you plan to conduct tests for objective information about the product or service under test according to project requirements. Your intent in conducting these tests is to is-
The requirements management plan is useful in Plan Quality Management because it-
Assume you are working to Manage Quality on your project. You decided you wanted to select a tool that could help result in cost reduction and quality improvement so you used-
You are leading a research project that will require between 10 and 20 aerospace engineers. Some senior-level aerospace engineers are available. They are more productive than junior-level engineers, who cost less and who are available as well. You want to determine the optimal combination of seniorand junior-level personnel. In this situation, the appropriate technique to use is to-
Check sheets are often called tally sheets. They are useful because they-
One area that often influences perceptions of quality is-
In Control Quality, it is useful to recognize when to use certain concepts, one of which is attribute sampling. Its concern is to-
Your project scheduler has just started working with your project and has produced defective reports for the past two accounting cycles. If this continues, these defective reports could provide the potential for customer dissatisfaction and lost productivity that is due to rework. You discovered that the project scheduler needs additional training on using the scheduling tool that is used on your project. The cost of training falls under which one of the following categories?
In order to use approved change requests as an input to Control Quality, it is important to-
As you work to prepare your quality management plan for your project, you want to be able to determine which project deliverables and processes will require quality review. Therefore, you should-
Assume you are working on preparing your project' quality management plan. As you prepare this plan, you and your team do not want to perform any unneeded rework, and you also want to keep the cost of quality low. Additionally, you want to meet the product's performance and reliability goals. Therefore, in preparing your plan, you should consider-
Project quality management was once thought to include only inspection or quality control. In recent years, the concept of project quality management has broadened. Failure to meet quality requirements can lead to-
Assume your organization is a start-up company, and you are trying to explain the importance of project quality management to the management team, which has not worked in this area before. You held an orientation session for them as to its importance. Then, you prepared your quality management plan and asked the management team to review it before it was completed and distributed to stakeholders. The purpose of their review was to-
Your quality assurance department recently performed a quality audit of your project and identified a number of findings and recommendations. One recommendation seems critical and should be implemented because it affects successful delivery of the product to your customer. Your next step should be to-
One way to monitor cost and schedule variances, volume, frequency of scope changes, and other results to determine if the project management processes are in control is to use control charts. Assume you are working on a project that implements a repetitive process as the result is used many times after the process is designed and tested in telecommunications. Since it is repetitive, the control limits are
Your project is intended to result in a new manufacturing process in your company as the current process has remained the same for the past 20 years. You are preparing your project's quality management plan. You know your key stakeholders prefer to see the reports and other data visually so as you prepare this plan you are using-
Assume previous projects in the organization have overrun their budgets consistently and tend to require more contingency reserves than in the original budget. You are striving to avoid the need for additional contingency on your project and are doing so by-
You want to prioritize the quality metrics as you are working in Plan Quality Management. An effective approach is to use-
Your management has prescribed that a quality audit be conducted at the end of every phase in a project. This audit is part of the organization's-
You are managing a major international project, and your contract requires you to prepare both a project plan and a quality management plan. Your core team is preparing a project quality management plan. You need to-
Recently your company introduced a new set of "metal woods" to its established line of golfing equipment. As you work in Plan Quality Management on this project, you decide to use a matrix diagram as it-
As you work to prepare your quality management plan and some quality metrics, you decide to create a single quality concept, which shows you are using-
On-time performance, CPI, defect frequency, failure rates, defects identified each day, down time each month, and customer satisfaction scores are examples of-
Rework required, causes for rejection, or the need for process adjustment are examples of-
Quality control measurements are captured-
Assume you are working to Manage Quality on your project. You are focusing on improving the quality management methods you are using. One approach to consider is-
An often, but important, overlooked output of the Manage Quality is used by other process and departments to take corrective action. This output is-
You are a project manager for residential construction. As a project manager, you must be especially concerned with building codes--particularly in the Plan Quality Management process. You must ensure that building codes are reflected in your project plans because-
You work as a project manager in the largest hospital in the region. Studies have shown that patients have to wait for long periods before being treated. To assist in identifying the factors contributing to this problem, you and your team have decided to use which of the following techniques?
Assume you are working to prepare your quality management plan as it is critical to success in your construction company. You realize as you do so that it would be helpful to have an overview of the tests required to verify requirements, so you decide to-
You have prepared your quality management plan and identified quality metrics. Now you are working to Manage Quality on your project. You want to know why you have a variance and some defects, so you decide to-
A tool used to verify that a set of required steps have been performed and incorporates acceptance criteria is-
One way to display the sequence of steps and the branching possibilities that exist for a process that transforms one or more inputs into one or more outputs is to use a process map or a-
Quality objectives of the project are recorded in-
The Manage Quality process consists of planned and systematic acts and processes. They help to-
You have decided to use a fishbone diagram to identify the relationship between an effect and its causes. To begin, you should first-
Assume you want to show the relationship between two variables. You then want to use a(n)-
Processes often interact with one another. For example, the output of a process may be an input to another process in a different knowledge are
You have been assigned as project manager on what could be a "bet the company" project. You realize that to be successful you need to exercise maximum control over project resources. You are both a manager and a leader in resource management. This means you must-
As the project manager, it is your goal to build a high-performing team. On your project, four of your nine team members know one another, but five are new to you and the rest of the team. As you work in team building, your objective is to-
Assume you are managing a large construction project to use solar power for electricity in a different country in a location that lacks easy access to transportation facilities. You must make sure all the equipment and other needed materials are available when you need them. Given the geographical location, it is a difficult task. Much of the construction equipment also is leased. As a result you need to-
You are leading a team to reorganize your IT department, so it is more customer oriented. Your team has 10 people. While your team members have competencies in IT, they are not in the department to promote objectivity. In your resource plan, you have a section on recognition to state when recognition and rewards will be given to members of your team. As you put this plan into practice, you should consider-
Which of the following factors contributes the most to team communication?
You are managing a virtual team. The project has been under way for several months, and you believe your team members do not view themselves as a team or a unified group. To help rectify this situation, you should-
Major difficulties arise when multiple projects need to be managed in the functional organizational structure because of-
Leadership is embedded in the job of the project manager and really in the job of every team member. Assume you are project manager with a team of two people who will work full-time on the project, and six people who will support the project on a part-time basis. All team members know one another and have worked together in the past. Leadership on this team is especially important-
Your organization is characterized by hierarchical organizational structures with rigid rules and policies and strict supervisory controls. Individual team members are not expected to engage in problem solving or use creative approaches to plan and execute work; management has these responsibilities. Your organization is characterized by which one of the following theories?
As you prepare your resource management plan, you need to provide guidance and determine the skills and capacity required to complete the activities in the project. This should be documented in the-
The primary purpose of effective team development is-
The team members on your project have been complaining that they do not have any sense of identity as a team because they are located in different areas of the building. To remedy this situation, you developed a project logo and had it printed on T-shirts to promote the project, but this action has not worked. Your next step is to-
You are managing a team of 120 internal members and four contractors. Given the size of this team, you want to document each team member's assignments. You can use a-
Assume you are preparing your resource management plan. Your goal is to ensure each work package has an owner, who is clearly identified, and all team members understand their roles and responsibilities. The best way to show these data is by using a(n)-
You are managing a design and construction project for the next-generation of drones. Your organization has been the leader in the drone business since it began, which means you are fortunate as your executive realize they would only increase in capabilities and popularity and acquired needed resources in house rather than rely on contractors to preserve intellectual property. On your project, you find you are in a dilemma as you need a specific type of crane from another department. If you do not get the crane when you need it, your project's schedule will slip dramatically. The best approach you can use in this situation is-
You have been a project manager for seven years. You now are managing the construction of a new facility that must comply with the government's newly issued environmental standards. You want to ensure that your team members are able to select methods to complete various activities on the project without needing to involve you in each situation. As you prepare your resource management plan, you should document this information in which of the following-
It is important on all projects to determine when and how human resources will be met. Assume that you are managing a project to assess methods for streamlining the regulatory approval process for new medical devices in your government agency. Because the agency has undergone downsizing during the past three years, subject matter experts are in short supply. You must determine whether the needed subject matter experts can be acquired from inside the agency or whether you must use contractors. This information should be documented in the-
Conflicts are inevitable on projects, but if actually managed effectively, at times conflicts can help the team arrive at a better solution. One of the challenges a project manager faces is-
As project manager, you are primarily responsible for implementing the project management plan by authorizing the execution of project activities. Because you do not work in a projectized organization, you do not have direct access to human resource administrative activities. Therefore, you need to-
Constant bickering, absenteeism, and substandard performance have characterized the behavior of certain members of your team. You have planned an off-site retreat for the team to engage in a variety of activities. Your primary objective for investing time and money in this event is because your team-
Two team members on your project often disagree. You need a conflict resolution method that provides a long-term resolution. You decide to use which one of the following approaches?
Assume you are working to prepare your resource management plan for your automotive company. You are going to design and then manufacture state-of-the-art vehicles of various types to surpass your competitors who are focused on self-autonomous vehicles. As you prepare your plan, one area to consider is-
As a project manager, you believe in using a "personal touch" to further team development. One approach that has proven effective toward this goal is-
Your project has been under way for some time with only a few direct reports. However, it then is your responsibility to-
You are the project manager for a two-year project that is now beginning its second year. The mix of team members has changed, and there is confusion as to roles and responsibilities. In addition, several of the completed work packages have not received the required sign-offs, and three work packages are five weeks behind schedule. To gain control of this project, you need to-
You are the project manager to develop a new medical implant device. You were selected to manage this project since you are an expert in medical implant devices. However, you strive to seek opinions from others. Now you are estimating the resources you will need for this project. You consulted with an estimating expert in the company and decided the best approach is to use-
Having estimated the resources you need for your new medical implant project, the next challenge is to acquire them. Resources seem to always be scarce in the company. Additionally, you also work in a matrix environment, so you have limited direct control over resource selection. Your best approach is to-
Assume although you did your best in negotiating and influencing others to release resources to you for your medical implant project, you were not successful. You now are concerned your project, even though it had a strong business case and was approved by the portfolio group, that you now have another constraint to consider, which is-
Decision making often is used as a tool and technique in Acquire Project Team. One approach is multi-criteria decision tool. An example of a selection criterion to consider is-
Assume your team of five people to develop a data base to assess testing methods for listeria in ice cream has worked together before. You expect that this team will be a high-performing team from the beginning, but you find two team members seem to disagree as to the vison of the project. You meet with these two people and find one of them really dislikes being on the project. You decide to ask your sponsor if this person can be reassigned, and another person added to the team. The sponsor agrees. This means-
Your organization is adopting a project-based approach to business, which has been difficult. Although project teams have been created, they are little more than a collection of functional and technical experts who focus on their specialties. You are managing the company's most important project. As you begin this project, you must place a high priority on-
Your company just learned it won a competitive proposal from your government to design a better safety system for food products in your country since there are not enough resources to inspect the imported food. You were listed in your company's proposal as the project manager since you have your PMP. You now are establishing your project team. You should consider-
Now that your project to develop the next generation prostate cancer drug is under way, you have gotten to know your team members and the skills and competencies they have. You now are in a position to assess their strengths and any areas of improvement. You decided one approach to use with more junior level team members was-
Work performance reports are especially helpful in the Manage Team process because-
Although most organizations conduct individual work performance reviews and appraisals, most of our work is done through teams. You decided since you have the luxury of a team of six people who are full-time to conduct an individual assessment but to concentrate on a team performance assessment. An example of an indicator you plan to use is-
You are working to estimate the activity resources you need for your new passenger train that your company will develop, own, and operate. It is to be able to travel at the speed of light, be quiet, and to be luxurious with no breakdowns in service. The goal is to test its appeal along a busy interstate highway system with stops only in three major cities. As you do so, you determined it would be helpful in addition to determining the needed resources to prepare a(n)-
A key benefit of the Plan Resource Management process is to determine the project organization chart. Therefore, an important first step is to-
Assume you decide to prepare a role-responsibility-authority form as you work on your project resource management plan. This form-
Assume you are estimating the activity resources you will need to make dirigibles a safe and fast way to travel. For this project, you will need a number of specialists as well as generalists to communicate externally as to the value of using a dirigible and its safety record. You also will need materials and equipment. As you work to estimate the resources, you believe it would be useful to consider-
Determining the method and the timing of releasing team members should be included in the-
The communications management process goes beyond distributing relevant information as it-
One purpose of the communications management plan is to provide information about the-
Project managers for international projects should recognize key issues in cross-cultural settings and place special emphasis on-
You are managing a project with team members located at customer sites on three different continents. As you plan communications with your stakeholders, you should review-
Having worked previously on projects as a team member, you are pleased to now be the project manager to develop a new process to ensure that software projects in your IT Department are considered a success and are not late or over budget. Many of your team members are new to the organization. You are working to prepare your communications management plan for your project. You want to describe communications as a process between two parties, so you decide to use-
As a project manager, you try to use active listening skills to help understand another person's frame of reference. In following this approach, you should-
Statements of organizational policies and philosophies, position descriptions, and constraints are examples of-
You have decided to organize a study group of other project managers in your organization to help prepare for the PMP(R) exam. What type of communication activity are you employing in your efforts to organize this group?
Your company CEO just sent you an e-mail asking you to make a presentation on your project, which has been in progress for 18 months, to over 50 identified internal and external stakeholders. You have been conducting such presentations and holding meetings regularly on this important project. You should begin by-
You are responsible for a project in your organization that has multiple internal customers. Because many people in your organization are interested in this project, you realize the importance of-
Project managers spend a great deal of time communicating with the team, the stakeholders, the client, and the sponsor. One can easily see the challenges involved, especially if one team member must communicate a technical concept to another team member in a different country. While there are different communications models to use, in this situation the first step is to-
On your project, scope changes, constraints, assumptions, integration and interface requirements, and overlapping roles and responsibilities pose communications challenges. The presence of communication barriers is most likely to lead to-
The most common communication problem that occurs during negotiation is that-
You finally have been appointed project manager for a major company project. One of your first activities as project manager will be to create the communications management plan. One of your goals is to use real time communications. This means as you share information among your stakeholders, you are using-
As an output of Plan Communications, it may be necessary to update the project documents, which include the-
Sample attributes of a communications management plan include which one of the following?
Feedback is a communication skill in Manage Communications. In it one receives information about his or her skill in-
The key benefit of the Monitor Communications process is-
The issue log is useful in Monitor Communications because it-
As head of the PMO, you will receive performance reports for all major projects. You decided to set a guideline for project managers as performance reporting should-
You are the project manager to devise and implement a strategy for your University to have greater recognition in the project management field. It has classes in all of the ten knowledge areas in project management, but few outside of its local area know about it. As you prepare your strategy, you decide it would be useful to form online communities with alumni, which are-
Communication is important when setting and managing expectations with the stakeholders. In preparing your communications management plan you realize-
In person-to-person communication, messages are sent on verbal levels and nonverbal levels simultaneously. To communicate effectively, the project manager should be-
As an output from Monitor Communications, it may be necessary to update the-
In project communications, the first step in a written communication is to-
A communications management plan includes which one of the following sample contents?
Your organization has decided to use project management for all of its endeavors. It has established a Center of Excellence for Project Management to support the movement into management by projects and has appointed you as its director. You have decided to focus on the methods used to transfer information, which then will be part of project communications management plans. In deciding the preferred approach, you need to determine-
You hear repeatedly that your client finds the format of the progress reports you submit to be one that does not meet their requirements. The client representatives complain they do not understand data in the reports. You know this is the case, since soon after you submit a report, the client representative calls you immediately to express concerns. Obviously, the communications requirements analysis you conducted is flawed. It also could be the communications methods you are using may not be effective. This situation shows it could have been avoided by-
Assume on your project you have identified 250 stakeholders located in three continents and of these 250, you have determined that 200 of them will be actively involved and interested in your project. Therefore, as you determine an appropriate communication method, your best approach is-
You want to ensure that the information you collect showing project progress and status is meaningful to stakeholders. However, while you have been managing projects for 15 years, you are new to this company. You decide as you prepare your communications management plan to-
Work performance information is an output of which process?
Assume you want to optimize the work performance reports you will use to Manage Communications. You should do so by-
Planned and ad hoc reports and presentations are a useful update to organizational process assets during which following process?
An example of a useful communications skill used in Manage Communications is-
Changes in the communications management and stakeholder engagement plans should trigger changes to the-
One way to determine how to best update and communicate project performance and respond to stakeholder information requests is to-
The purpose of work performance data in Monitor Communications is to-
Because communications planning often is linked tightly with enterprise environmental factors, you should recognize that-
You are working on a project with 15 stakeholders. Each of your 10 team members have a secret security clearance, and as the project manager, you have a top-secret security clearance as you work for a government contractor. As you prepare your communications management plan, you need to determine-
You have surveyed the stakeholders in your stakeholder register to help determine their communications requirements. The majority of the respondents, 95%, want information distributed directly to them. This situation shows-
As the project manager, you have the option of proposing one of three systems to a client: a full-feature system that not only satisfies the minimum requirements but also offers numerous special functions (the "Mercedes"); a system that meets the client's minimum requirements (the "Smart Car"); and a system that satisfies the minimum requirements plus has a few extra features (the "Toyota"). The on-time records and associated profits and losses are depicted on the below decision tree. What is the expected monetary value of the "Toyota" system? Profit/loss e $100,000 On tim 60% = Prob Late Pro b= 40% ($30,000) s de ce er M e $50,000 On tim 90% Toyota r o b = P Late Pro b= 10% ($10,000) Yu go e $10,000 On tim 99% r o b = P Late Pro b= 1% ($1000)
A risk response strategy that can be used for both threats and opportunities is-
The risk urgency is a tool and technique used for-
Projects are particularly susceptible to risk because-
As project manager, you have assembled the team to prepare a risk management plan for your project. It is to describe how risk management will be handled on your project. Within this plan, there is a-
You are working on identifying possible risks to your project to develop a nutritional supplement. You want to develop a comprehensive list of risks that can be addressed later through qualitative and quantitative risk analysis. A data gathering technique used to identify risks is-
Assume you have prepared your risk management plan, identified possible risks, analyzed them, and determined possible responses if they occur. Now it is time to Implement Risk Responses. The benefit of this process is to-
You are working Monitor Risks on your manufacturing project. You are fortunate to have a subject matter expert available with a specialty in risk management to assist you and your team. As you work to monitor these risks, you want to make sure your team and stakeholders are aware of-
Most statistical simulations of budgets, schedules, and resource allocations use which one of the following approaches?
Assume you are using probability and impact analysis. In the below example, if the odds of completing activities 1, 2, and 3 on time are 50 percent, 50 percent, and 50 percent, what are the chances of starting activity 4 on day 6? Activity 1 5 days Start Activity 2 Activity 4 5 days Activity 3 5 days
A project health check identified a risk that your project would not be completed on time. You and your team are working to prevent this from occurring as you work to Implement Risk Responses. You and your team know risk management is continuous on projects, and new risks will occur. When they do occur analysis is needed, and a response strategy is determined. Your goal is to see if the strategy is executed. As you do so, you should use-
You are developing radio frequency (RF) technology that will improve overnight package delivery to one hour. You realize that the duration, cost, and resource requirements for a number of activities are uncertain. You want a model to represent individual project risk and other sources of uncertainty. This shows that for your next step you plan to-
You are determining the most effective risk response to a risk one of your team members identified. After analyzing it and including a risk management expert in the analysis process, it is evident it is a risk where the threat is such that it is outside of your authority as the project manager to determine a response. In this situation, you need to-
If the probability of event 1 is 80 percent and of event 2 is 70 percent and they are independent events, how likely is it that both events will occur?
The project scope statement should be used in the Identify Risk process because it-
Your project team has identified all the risks on the project and has categorized them as high, medium, and low. As you work to Monitor Risks, you want to consider all three categories as a low risk can change quickly to a medium or high risk given changes that the project may encounter. Therefore, you plan to-
A contingency reserve is used for-
The simplest form of quantitative risk analysis and modeling techniques is-
If a business venture has a 60-percent chance to earn $2 million and a 20-percent chance to lose $1.5 million, what is the expected monetary value of the venture?
You are managing the construction of a highly sophisticated data center in Southeast Asi
A recent earned value analysis shows that your project is 20 percent complete, the CPI is 0.67, and the SPI is 0.87. In this situation, you should-
The purpose of a numeric scale in risk management is to-
Risk score measures the-
In Monitor Risks the project manager, the team, and key stakeholders need to be aware of the level of risk exposure; new, changing, or outdated risks; and changes in the level of overall project risk. Information from project execution then is used to determine whether to-
The primary advantage of using decision tree analysis in project risk management is that it-
Your project is using complex, unproven technology. Your team conducted a brainstorming session to identify risks. Poor allocation of project resources was the number one risk. This risk was placed on the risk register, which included at this point a-
When managing current projects, it is important to use lessons learned from previous projects to improve the organization's project management process. Therefore, in the Identify Risks process one can review the-
Risk mitigation involves-
Risk management is not a one-time process and transcends project management. Risks are first discussed as part of the-
Two key inputs to the Perform Quantitative Risk Analysis process are the-
Often in preparing the risk management plan meetings are held. The key purpose of these meetings is to-
As you work to Identify Risk, an item to review is-
A risk audit is a useful tool and technique in Monitor Risks because it-
Accurate and unbiased data are essential for Perform Qualitative Risk Analysis. The best approach to follow is to use-
Assigning more talented resources to the project to reduce time to completion or to provide better quality than originally planned are examples of which one of the following strategies?
You are striving to determine whether to accept a risk or transfer it to a contractor. You also may decide to just avoid the risk. You can-
Assume you remain unclear about what to do about a possible risk that may affect the overall project. You and your team have several strategies you can use, but before selecting one, you decide to-
Assume that you are working on a new product for your firm. Your CEO learned that a competitor was about to launch a new product that has similar features to those of your project. The competitor plans to launch the product on September 1. It is now March 1. Your schedule called for you to launch your product on December 1. Your CEO now has now mandated that you fast track your project, so you can launch your product on August 1. This fast track schedule is an example of an-
As head of the project management office, you need to focus on those items where risk responses can lead to better project outcomes. One way to help you make these decisions is to-
You are the project manager for the construction of an incinerator to burn refuse. Local residents and environmental groups are opposed to this project. Management agrees to move this project to a different location. This is an example of which one of the following risk responses?
Assume you are working on a complex project. In fact, it is the most complex project in your organization, so the CEO is interested in it and asks questions about its progress in staff meetings. On this project, you are outsourcing a lot of this work. This means you should-
You have decided to contract for services as resources are scarce in your company. These services may range from junior-level staff to senior-level staff to people with specialized expertise to those who are generalists. Another term for contracting for service is a-
Contract type selection is dependent on the degree of risk or uncertainty facing the project manager. From the perspective of the buyer, the preferred contract type in a low-risk situation is-
The buyer has negotiated a cost-plus-incentive fee contract with the seller. The contract has a target cost of $300,000, a target fee of $40,000, a share ratio of 80/20, a maximum fee of $60,000, and a minimum fee of $10,000. If the seller has actual costs of $380,000, how much fee will the buyer pay?
Assume you are managing a project and have decided to outsource about 40% of the work. You expect to award three contracts for certain work packages in the WBS. The benefit of this Conduct Procurements process is that it-
You are monitoring and controlling the three contracts on your project. You find that two of the sellers' performance is above average, but the third seller is failing to deliver as planned, and when this seller does deliver, the costs are higher than planned. You decide this seller's performance is not going to improve. Your best course of action is to-
You issued a RFP, and when the proposals were received, there were expected differences in the price and managerial approach sections. What was surprising was the range of different technical approaches that were offered. You then decided to-
You are a contractor for a state agency. Your company bid on a high-value project with a firm-fixed price contract for a water resource management project for your state. Before the agency selected a seller, its project manager decided to-
You are working to prepare your procurement management plan. You are planning to determine the type of contract to issue, but first you want to see possible costs as your University is updating its software used by students and faculty. You decide to-
You are awarding a contract to help develop a new feature in the 12th generation phone. You feel this feature will enable your company to outpace the competition. Since you want to outdistance the competition, you want the contractor to have the best and brightest people on its staff. As you select source selection criteria, you should include-
You are working to determine the type of contact for your data warehousing project and you want to have a number of sellers bid on this opportunity However, the project is not located in a desirable area and is it is in a remote part of your country. You decide to gauge interest and decide to-
A number of administrative activities are important in procurement management. For example, you should retain-
Recent data indicate that more than 10,000 airline passengers are injured each year from baggage that falls from overhead bins. You performed a make-or-buy analysis and decided to outsource an improved bin design and manufacture. The project team needs to develop a list of qualified sources. As a general rule, which method would the project team find especially helpful-
You are working to monitor and control your three contacts on your program. Your company is certified by the Software Engineering Institute's Capability Maturity Model for Integration, which means your three contactors also hold this certification. Of the following tools and techniques to use, you select-
You are working on a new project in your organization. You need to decide how best to staff the project and handle all its resource requirements. You decide to-
Your company decided to award a contract for project management services on a pharmaceutical research project. Because your company is new to project management and does not understand the full scope of services that may be needed under the contract, it is most appropriate to award a-
Requirements for warranty and future product support are found in the-
You plan to award a contract to provide project management training for your company. You decide it is important that any prospective contractor have an association with a major University that awards master's certificates in project management. This is an example of-
The project team has the responsibility to ensure a procurement agreement-
During the course of working with a seller that no one had worked with previously and is working on site with your team, in preparing the contract you specified that inspections and audits can be conducted. You decided to hire an outside person, considered to be an expert in project management to conduct an audit. In doing so, it is important to ensure that-
Assume you have completed your make-or-buy analysis and decided to outsource most of the development of safe flying cars to ease traffic congestion in your city. You are determining your procurement strategy. One of its objectives is to-
Specifications, quality levels, desired quality, performance data, performance period, and location are items to-
An often-overlooked output of the Conduct Procurements process is-
Assume you have completed your procurement management plan and your make-or-buy analysis and now are updating project documents as a result of this work. You need to update the-
You have decided to award a contract to a seller that has provided quality services to your company frequently in the past. Your current project, although somewhat different from previous projects, is similar to other work the seller has performed. In this situation, to minimize your risk you should award what type of contract?
As project manager, you need a relatively fast and informal method addressing disagreements with contractors. One such method is to submit the issue in question to an impartial third party for resolution. This process is known as-
Work performance data often are used in Control Procurements to show-
In the Plan Procurement Management process, potential sellers are evaluated especially if the buyer wants to exercise some degree of influence or control over acquisition decisions. This means thought also should be given to-
A buyer has negotiated a fixed-price-incentive-fee contract with the seller. The contract has a target cost of $200,000, a target profit of $30,000, and a target price of $230,000. The buyer also has negotiated a ceiling price of $270,000 and a share ratio of 70/30. If the seller completes the contract with actual costs of $170,000, how much profit will the buyer pay the seller?
Requirements for acceptance criteria are defined in the-
Sellers of course want to be paid once they have delivered what they promised in the agreement. This means payment information is-
Assume before you award a contract, you and your team are striving to identify areas that may have more risk. You decide to-
Assume in your project, you need to use a contractor. But you and the seller have a prior agreement in place. This means together you can prepare a procurement statement of work. It is an example of-
You work for an aerospace and defense contractor, and you plan to outsource 75% of the work as you develop the next generation passenger jet. Because so much outsourcing will be used, you decide to use a systems integration contractor who will integrate and oversee the work of the other contractors. In this situation, you plan to use a-
Although you finished your procurement management plan, you and your team decided since the project is so complex that you would be outsourcing about 50% of the work to be done on your new drug to cure macular degeneration. Given the large procurement, you decided it would be helpful to-
You are working on a complex project designed to combat glaucoma without the need to take eye drops. You are going to outsource part of the work to experts in the glaucoma field and have identified four sellers that are capable and respected. These sellers-
Assume you thought you would need to outsource part of your work on your telecom project. You conducted a make-or-buy analysis, and the decision was made not to outsource, This means-
You are the project manager with a team to design the next generation of automobiles for your company. After an extensive make-or-buy analysis, you have determined which items will be outsourced. Now you are working on the statements of work for each item to be procured. It is important as you do so to-
Which of the following types of contracts has the least risk to the seller?
Assume that your company has a cost-plus-fixed-fee contract. The contract value is $110,000, which consists of $100,000 of estimated costs with a 10-percent fixed fee. Assume that your company completes the work but only incurs $80,000 in actual cost. What is the total cost to the project?
During your project, you will have a number of different types of meetings. Some will be informational, others will be key updates, and some will be for decision-making purposes. While different attendees will attend each meeting, a best practice to follow is to:
You are managing a project with team members located at customer sites on three different continents. You have a number of stakeholders on your project, and most of them are located outside of the corporate office. As you work to monitor and control Stakeholder Engagement, you should-
When you are preparing your project charter, you also are identifying your stakeholders although you continue the process throughout the project. As you are doing so, you decide to do some stakeholder analysis. You decide to classify stakeholders based on directions of influence, which means you are-
You are responsible for a project in your organization that has multiple internal customers. Because many people in your organization are interested in this project, you decide to prepare a stakeholder engagement strategy. Before preparing this strategy, you first should-
Recognizing the importance of preparing a stakeholder engagement plan, you met with your team to obtain their buy in and to discuss it. You explained the key benefit of Plan Stakeholder Engagement is to-
Assume you are actively working, along with your team, to manage stakeholder engagement on your project to develop a new drug to prevent any retina problems of any type. You know you must manage their engagement throughout the project life cycle. This means some project documents will need updating including-
Stakeholders often have issues, and you have asked each of your team members to document them. At each team meeting, you and your team discuss them and determine appropriate responses. You have a project issue log, which is-
As you work on your project to update its software training classes to focus on an agile approach, you have a number of key stakeholders. As many students and their managers are requesting these classes, your CEO has taken a special interest in your project and has asked you to accelerate your schedule to complete it in two months rather than in your planned six months but still have quality offerings. This means as you work to monitor overall project stakeholder relationships, you should-
As you work with your team to prepare your stakeholder engagement plan, you decided to develop a stakeholder engagement assessment matrix. You set it up, so you could-
Assume you are working to prepare your stakeholder engagement plan. You want it to reflect the diverse information needs of your project stakeholders as you prepare your plan. However, you recognize you will need to update it because your stakeholders will change especially since your project will last two years. A trigger situation that shows it is time to update the plan is-
Having worked as a project manager for nine years, you know how important it is to identify the critical stakeholders, so you do not overlook anyone who has a major influence on your project even if you do not ever plan to meet with or talk with this individual. As you work with your team, you explain the key benefit of the Identify Stakeholder Process is that it-
Assume you are working to Identify Stakeholders and are now gathering information about the stakeholders on your project. You decide to allow people who will participate in your brainstorming session to consider the questions you plan to ask before you meet as a group. This approach is-
You realize that on projects, some stakeholders will not be as receptive as others to your project and actually can be negative from the beginning. Assume you have classified your stakeholders on your project designed to ensure students in your city have access to the best educational resources available, whether in class or on line. Now you are preparing your stakeholder engagement plan, and you want to determine the appropriate strategy to improve each stakeholder' level of engagement. You decide to-
Stakeholder engagement involves a number of critical activities. An example is-
Work performance information is an output of Monitor Stakeholder Engagement. It includes a number of items, one of which is-
Often in working as a project manager, it is easy to overlook key stakeholders. Assume you work for a device manufacturer and are working as the project manager for the next generation valve replacement. Your company has been a leader in this market, which means you have a lot of lessons learned available to you. Your project is scheduled to last four years. As a best practice, you should-
Assume you are managing the development of a construction project in your city to replace its five bridges so they are state of the art and meet updated safety standards since they originally were constructed 20 years ago. The design work has been completed, you have awarded subcontracts, and are set to begin construction. Today your legal department told you to stop work as you had not consulted them, and there was a critical standard you overlooked during the design process. This example shows-
Assume your construction project is for a small city with only 8,500 people. There has been opposition to it from the beginning, when the City Commissioners approved it by many residents. The residents recognize they will be severely impacted as the new bridges are implemented, and during the public hearings before the Commissioners' decision, they hired an attorney to state they felt the more cost-effective approach was to strengthen the bridges, so they meet today's safety requirements. Residents now know you have been ordered to stop work, and they have requested a meeting with the Commission on Tuesday. This means you should-
The salience model is one way to classify stakeholders. In it-
In Plan Stakeholder Engagement, a number of organizational assets are used as inputs, which include-
Assume you have identified your stakeholders and are preparing your stakeholder engagement plan. You are fortunate that your team is a collocated team as you are working on an internal project to reorganize your IT Department, so it is focused more on its customers. The project sponsor is the Chief Operating Officer, and the IT Department Director was surprised as she thought all was well. However, you notice when planning meetings are held, the Chief Financial Officer never attends. You feel since IT affects the entire company, all the senior leaders need some type of involvement. You therefore feel the Chief Financial Officer may be-
Assume your stakeholder engagement plan has been approved. You now are working with your team to promote stakeholder engagement on your project. You explain in a team meeting its benefit is to-
The stakeholder register should not be prepared only one time, but it should be updated regularly especially if-
Working to foster stakeholder engagement, as the project manager, you know interpersonal and team skills are needed. An example of a key interpersonal and team skill in Manage Stakeholder Engagement is-
Stakeholder engagement must be monitored on a continuous basis for it to be effective. You realize a number of project documents can be useful for you as a project manager. An example is-
Expert judgment is a tool and technique in Identify Stakeholders. To use it effectively on your project, you should-
Enterprise environmental factors are useful in many projects. In Plan Stakeholder Engagement an example of one of particular importance is-
Stakeholder engagement involves more than improving communications and requires more than just managing a team. This is because it-
Assume you are beginning your project to develop a series of residential condominiums in your city and are identifying possible stakeholders. A key organizational process asset you can review is-
One way to develop an understanding of major project stakeholders to exchange and analyze project information about roles and interests is to-
Assume you are managing a project to implement a Software as a Service medical record system in your ophthalmologist's office. You have been working to identify your stakeholders to then make sure everyone is committed to it as some people have been working in this office for more than 20 years and are comfortable with the current approach. At this point, you used document analysis, which includes-
Having prepared stakeholder engagement plans on previous projects, you know it is positive to review the project management plan because it-
Assume you have performed your stakeholder analysisand now are working to enhance it with a stakeholder engagement assessment matrix. Such a matrix shows the stakeholder's current engagement level. These data help-
A trend and emerging practice in Project Stakeholder Engagement is to-
Working on your project to design and construct five new bridges for your City, you are striving to actively engage the stakeholders on your project, especially those who will be inconvenienced by the project and have indicated they do not support it. You decided to-
An input to consider for the Monitor Stakeholder Engagement process is-
As a result of the Monitor Stakeholder Engagement process, you realize even though this process is under way from the beginning until the closing phase that you have identified the root cause of some issues you have faced in monitoring stakeholders' expectations. You should therefore-
Identifying strategies to promote productive involvement of stakeholders is useful to the project manager as he or she works with stakeholders. It should be documented as part of the-
A number of organizational process assets are useful as inputs to the Manage Stakeholder Engagement process. An example is-
Multi-criteria decision analysis and voting are examples of-
You recently took over a relatively new project expected to last another seven years. The previous project manager completed most of the WBS. When you begin to define the project activities, you realize that the WBS work packages expected to occur in the next year are planned in detail, but the work packages for later in the future (three years or more) are not planned with much detail, if any detail at all. You determine-
You are managing a project to transform your organization into one that is more customer centric as your executives realize they no longer can assume existing customers will stay with your firm given offerings by the competition. You and your team identified over 300 stakeholders and classified them. You realize 45 are influential but negative to the project. You then prepared your stakeholder engagement plan. Now, you find you are addressing concerns from these stakeholders plus others, and it consumes most of your time. However, it is important because-
On your project to construct a new runway for your City's airport, you are in the process of selecting sellers for various parts of this project. You have conducted your make-or-buy analysis and have issued Requests for Proposals. Before accepting a proposal, you decide to-
Requirements always are a concern to ensure stakeholder needs are met. Your organizational leaders even have noted the importance of capturing the right requirements to help ensure project success. They have set up a business analysis group, and everyone in it is certificated in business analysis. Since your project is one that has captured your senior manager's attention, the importance of collecting the right requirements and avoiding scope creep is emphasized by your sponsor and other key stakeholders. A business analyst is working with you and your team in collaborative way. As you wok to collect requirements you first focus on-
The project life cycle, management reviews, and the development approach in the Develop Project Management Plan process are-
You are managing a project that has five subcontractors. You must monitor contract performance, make payments, and manage provider interfaces. One subcontractor submitted a change request to expand the scope of its work. You decided to award a contract modification based on a review of this request. All these activities are part of-
Your project management plan has been approved, and since your company follows a stage-gate approach, you are now in the executing phase. You have collected a lot of data, and these data are viewed as-
Assume you are managing a small project with a budget of $50,000 to redesign how training is conducted in your organization. Your team has three people who work on the project part time and are subject matter experts. Your project charter has been approved, and now you are working on your project management plan. You know a best practice is to have a kick-off meeting so you-
While working as the project manager on a new project to improve overall ease of use in the development of a railroad switching station, you have decided to add a subject matter expert who specializes in ergonomics to your team. She has decided to observe the existing approach as you and your team work to define requirements for the new system. This method is also called-
In addition to providing support to the project, Manage Quality also provides an umbrella for-
As you manage the railroad switching station project, you are concerned that the business analyst who was responsible for preparing the WBS may have overlooked some parts of the project. In order to see if the WBS requires enhancements you decide to-
Assume that you are managing a project in which 80% has been outsourced to various sellers. In terms of contract administration, a key aspect is-
Manual and automated tools can support configuration management and change management. The use of the specific tools supports project stakeholder needs, which include organizational and environmental consideration and/or constraints. Since your project involves the development of flying cars in congested urban areas, you believe you should use both configuration and change control. In configuration control, your last step is to-
You need to outsource the testing function of your project. Your subcontracts department informed you that the following document must be prepared before conducting the procurement-
Assume you are working to Monitor and Control Project Work. A useful tool and technique is-
You are pleased to be managing a project to enhance and upgrade the landfill system in your city. Nothing has changed since it was first created more than 20 years ago. You prepared your business case along with your sponsor, and the project is authorized because of a-
To identify inefficient and ineffective policies, processes, and procedures in use on a project, you should conduct-
Your project management office implemented a project management methodology that emphasizes the importance of integrated change control. It states that change requests may include-
Since projects involve change, change requests then will be needed. Every documented change request must be approved by a responsible person, who is-
A number of tools and techniques are helpful in the Perform Integrated Change Control process. You have a CCB on your project, and with it, you plan to use-
Having worked previously as a software project manager, you were pleased to be appointed as the project manager for a new systems integration project designed to replace the existing air traffic control system in your country. You found a requirements traceability matrix to be helpful on software projects, so you decided to use it on this systems integration project. Using such a matrix helps to ensure that each requirement-
You are working on a complex project in the medical device field. You have about 55 internal stakeholders and a very large number of external stakeholders with the regulatory and consumer interest groups along with the medical profession. You need to be aware of their risk tolerances as they are examples in the Direct and Manage Project Work process of-
Working in the Perform Integrated Change Control process, you want to study the impact of the change on the project's scope. Therefore, you need to consider the-
Your company has over the past two years changed its methodologies and now is using agile. You are working to Manage Quality on your project. Therefore, your focus is on-
You are working to validate the scope of your project to ensure it meets acceptance criteri
There are a number of activities for administrative closure of the project or a phase. The first one is-
You are in the process of performing managing quality on your project's product and find that some requirements are not as complete as they should be, which causes rework and adds costs to your overall project. One approach to decide your next steps is-
Assume you are working on a complex project, with team members located in four countries. Your company is striving to be the first to market with a new medical device that if a patient requires a stent, he or she will never require another one. Your project is in the top three in the company's portfolio, and executives are reviewing it closely. You have a number of unknown unknowns on this project, which means-
Assume your organization has changed its project management methodology so it is focused on an agile/adaptive environment. This change took time to implement since people tend to resist change, but now some are recognizing its value. You decided that since you had your PMP to become certified as well in agile. Now you are using an agile approach on your project. In this approach, you-
You are executing your organizational transformation project to move toward a managing-by-project culture. To do so effectively, you want to connect people to people, so they can work together and create new knowledge as this project continues. Your goal is to share tacit knowledge and also integrate the knowledge of your diverse team. It is an innovative and complex project. To help you in this area, you decide to use-
An approach to provide insight into the health of the project and to identify any areas that require special attention is to-
Although your company's project life cycle does not mandate when a project review should be conducted, you believe it is important to review performance at the conclusion of each phase. The objective of such a review is to-
In the performing project stage of team development, it now is time for the project manager to-
Assume that your actual costs are $1,000; your planned value is $1,200; and your earned value is $1,500. Based on these data, what can be determined regarding your schedule variance?
You are concerned because when you did your stakeholder engagement assessment matrix, one of the stakeholders you classified as leading seems to now lack interest in your project. This stakeholder, your Chief Financial Officer, is someone you consider critical to success. You have been monitoring stakeholder engagement throughout the project. You realize you need to meet with this stakeholder personally and have a meeting scheduled. You want to see if the Chief Financial Officer feels you need to modify your stakeholder engagement strategies and plan. During this meeting you plan to-
The CPI on your project is 0.44, which means that you should-
Assume your organization is adopting the use of agile, but before it is used on all projects, you are testing its use on your project. Even though agile has different methods, you must prepare a cost estimate. The best approach to use is-
Which of the following tools and techniques is used in the Close Project or Phase process?
Assume you have prepared your cost estimate to update the technology for your liquefied natural gas pipeline, which was constructed ten years ago. Now, you are working to develop you budget. But you have some funding limits to consider as you do so, which means you-
Your company, noted for its use of innovative technology in its work, is also noted for exceeding its budget. On your project, you have been asked by the executive team to keep costs under control. You are focusing your attention on-
While managing a large project in your organization, you realize that your project team requires training in contract administration because you will be awarding several major contracts. After you analyze your project requirements and assess the expertise of your team members, you decide that your team will need a one-week class in contract administration. This training should-
Assume that on your project, you are using earned value management. You also are conducting performance reviews. You recognize, though, that an important aspect of cost control is determining the cause and variance compared to the cost baseline. You have found that-
Your project sponsor has asked you, "What do we now expect the total job to cost?" Given that you are using earned value, you should calculate the-
One key reason that the Develop Project Charter process is so important is that it-
Your company has been awarded a contract for project management consulting services for a major government agency. You were a member of the proposal writing team, are PMP(R) certified, and you are the project manager. You are now working to prepare your project management plan, which is to be submitted in one week. You decided to use some interpersonal and team skills to help develop your plan. While a number are possible, you selected-
Assume you had a phase gate meeting with your Governance Board for your project to develop the next generation radar system as part of the nation's airspace modernization program. At this meeting, the Board approved your project management plan. However, as you begin to execute your plan, an organizational process asset to consider is-
Consider the data in the table below. Assume that your project consists only of these three activities. Your estimate at completion is $4,400.00. This means you are calculating your EAC by using which of the following formulas? Activity % Complete PV EV AC A 100 2,000 2,000 2,200 B 50 1,000 500 700 C 0 1,000 0 0
Assume you are preparing your stakeholder engagement plan. As you do so, you want to make sure in the decisions you make that you-
The lessons learned documentation is an output from the-
Your experience has taught you that inappropriate responses to cost variances can produce quality or schedule problems or unacceptable project risk. When leading a team meeting to discuss the importance of cost control, you note that cost control is concerned with-
You are pleased to be the project manager for a new video conferencing system for your global organization. You want it to be one that is easy to use and is state of the art. As the project manager, you also are the project leader. You want to create an environment to facilitate team work and motivate the team with challenges and opportunities. As you do so, you want to concentrate on-
You are developing the next generation of your financial management system. In preparing your project management plan, you decided that you would use an agile approach rather than the typical waterfall approach your organization has used in the past. Agile is-
Your company is in the project management training business. In addition, the company publishes several exam study aids for the PMP(R) and CAPM(R) exam. You have your PMP(R), and you have been appointed as the project manager to make sure your company's training materials are updated to be aligned with the new PMBOK(R) Guide. You must complete your project in six months. Your schedule is complete, and you are working now to monitor and control it. Your company is testing agile on your project to consider whether all of its projects should use it. You need to be concerned about-
You are trying to determine whether or not to conduct 100% final system tests of 500 ground-based radar units at the factory. The historical radar field failure rate is 4%; the cost to test each unit in the factory is $10,000; the cost to reassemble each passed unit after the factory test is $2,000; the cost to repair and reassemble each failed unit after factory test is $23,000; and the cost to repair and reinstall each failed unit in the field is $350,000. Using decision tree analysis, what is the expected value if you decide to conduct these tests?
Motivation is dynamic and complex. The overall success of the project depends on the team's commitment to it, which is directly related to motivation. On your project, you want to create an environment to meet project objectives, but you want to motivate your team to-
Each time you meet with your project sponsor, she emphasizes the need for cost control. To address her concerns, you should provide-
One output of the Control Costs process is cost forecasts, which is when-
You work for an electrical utility company and will be managing a project to build a new substation that will serve a new industrial park. This project was authorized because of a business need, and you have a defined business case for it. Not to be overlooked in the early stage of this project is the-
You are about to close your project. In doing so you are using trend analysis, which is-
In order to manage risk appropriately on your project, you want to know the thresholds of your key stakeholders for risk, which is-
You are following a collaborative approach as you lead you team and are conducting a team assessment in addition to individual assessments. The performance of a successful team is measured in terms of-
Your project is considered very risky. You plan to perform numerous what-if scenarios on your schedule using simulation software that will define each schedule activity and calculate a range of possible durations for each activity. The simulation then will use the collected data from each activity to calculate a distribution curve (or range) for the possible outcomes of the total project. Your planned approach is an example of which of the following techniques?
In Monitor Communications, you want to ensure the communications needs of stakeholders are met. It then is useful to-
You and your team are preparing your program management plan. While much of your plan reflects plans developed in other processes, one plan that often is overlooked is the-
Lessons learned are important throughout project management. In fact, your lessons-learned register is updated as an output of the manage stakeholders engagement process, so it contains-
Each project is unique. Assume you are managing a project and are in the process of developing your schedule for it. However, your Enterprise Project Management Office has mandated a detailed methodology that must be followed on all projects. You have asked for a waiver as you are managing a project in which you need specific subject matter experts available at specific times. In the Estimate Activity Duration process, you need to consider-
As stakeholders engage with the project, your goal is to monitor stakeholder relationships and tailor strategies by modifying engagement strategies and plans. As the project manager, this means you should-
Once you were appointed project manager and worked to prepare your charter and project management plan, you realized monitoring and controlling transcended the project. You realized change is common on projects, and you wanted to exploit and embrace it. This meant you-
Assume you are new to your company and you are working as a project manager to make your IT department more customer centric. You worked with you team and identified the key stakeholders. Now, you are preparing your stakeholder engagement plan. You realize additional information about the environment in which the company works would be helpful, so you decide to-
Assume your project is to last three years. You know you will have a lot of stakeholders who are interested in just one phase of your project, and also during this time, you expect some team members will move to advance their careers, and new team members will join the project. As you prepare your project management plan-
Activity attributes are used to extend the description of the activity and to identify its multiple components. In the early stages of the project, an example of an activity attribute is-
You are working on a new project in your city to construct an environmentally friendly landfill. The existing site is so undesirable that many residents have moved to other neighboring cities because of their proximity to it. However, even though the project has the support of the public, you need to have a number of hearings with the city's government before you are authorized to begin work. As you are in the planning phase of the project, you are waiting for these hearings to be scheduled and held before you can begin site preparation. These hearings are an example of-
You are working on a project and want to know how many activities in the previous month were completed with significant variances. You should use a(n)-
During your project, designed to last three years, to produce flying automobiles in certain parts of your country to avoid extreme traffic congestion, you know team members will not be on your project the entire time. Therefore, your goal with your team members and your contractors is to focus on managing project knowledge. You want to avoid a misperception, which is-
Two of your team members, who are subject matter expert in Cloud computing, are having a technical conflict. While you lack their detailed level of expertise in this area, you do know enough about it to discuss their concerns and hopefully resolve the conflict they are having. Your goal is to harmonize relationships meaning you are using which conflict resolution approach?
Assume after working for a year with a team of four people to assist you, your project to convert all of the organizational process assets in the company to ones that can be easily accessed electronically is complete. You are now closing your project. As you do so, you realize many project documents will be updated. Of particular importance is the-
You are working on a mega construction project located in the middle of a jungle. Much of the work is outsourced. Your company is known for being a leader in the field and also in project management. You are using the Building Information Model. This means you-
You are beginning a new project staffed with a virtual team located across five different countries. To help limit conflict and misunderstandings concerning the justification, objectives, and high-level requirements of the project among your team members and their functional managers, you ask the project sponsor to prepare a-
You want to make sure that when you complete your project to merge two large government agencies in your country that everyone will be pleased with your overall result. While this project is a major undertaking, and many people fear they will lose their jobs in the process, your goal is to have a quality project once you and your team finish the work. Quality is everyone's responsibility. To best Control Quality, you need to-
Many different factors can influence the project team. As the project manager and leader, one should be aware of
Recently, your company introduced a new processing system for its products. When you did so, you outsourced 75% of the work as you and your team focused on involving the internal stakeholders in the process and preparing them for the changes. To handle the outsourcing successfully, you need to-
As the project manager, you are negotiating with functional managers and other project managers to staff your project with the required levels of expertise. To determine the most appropriate criteria to select your team, you decided to-
On your manufacturing project, management realizes that immediate corrective action is required to the material requirements planning (MRP) system to minimize rework. You lack the needed resources and costs are now overrunning the budget. To implement the necessary changes, you should follow-
You are the project manager on a project to improve traffic flow in the company's parking garage. Increasingly a lot of accidents have occurred as people are in a hurry, and often there has been road rage. Your plan is to achieve customer satisfaction with your new approach. You do not want problems after your work is complete and you decide to-
You are working on an international project in which some of your 25 team members will be working in a country in which your company lacks previous experience. As you work to negotiate for people to work on your project, since you work in a matrix structure, you realize you need to-
Schedule control is one important way to avoid delays. While planning and executing schedule recovery, one tool available to you for Control Schedule is-
You have been the project manager for your nuclear submarine project for four years. While you did not assume this position until the project management plan had been prepared and approved, you find you spend a significant amount of time collecting data and communicating. You also spend time reviewing the impact of project changes and implementing ones that have been approved. Often you have had to modify a non-conforming product, which means you are spending time on-
You were assigned recently as the project manager of a program management office project to implement a new enterprise-wide scheduling system for use throughout your company. You identify the need for a project charter to provide you with appropriate authority for applying resources, completing the project work, and formally initiating the project. Who should issue the project charter?
Your customer has expressed an interest in becoming more involved on your project, and you believe it would be desirable, so the customer and his representatives get to know you and your team better and can establish a great working relationship. You have decided to-
You are managing a construction project located in a desert to build a new way to generate electrical power. It is in this remote location as stakeholders will not know about it and become negative toward it if it were near their homes. To ensure physical resources arrive as specified, the project manager must-
You are working to control resource use on your manufacturing project, which requires different types of physical resources. You want to allocate and use the necessary materials in a timely and effective way. Fortunately, your organization specializes in this area and has a knowledge repository available, which is easy to access and use. It includes-
You are preparing your cost estimate for your project in robotics. Already, some competitors have learned about this product, and they want to be possible purchasers of the project when it is complete. You consider this to be an opportunity, which means-
You are planning a project and want to account for how the project will be managed in the future. While building your cost performance data, you want to provide guidance for when the project is later executed, because you know that different responses are required depending upon the degree of variance from the baseline. For example, a variance of 10 percent might not require immediate action, whereas a variance of 20 percent will require more immediate action and investigation. You decide to include the details of how to manage the cost variances in the-
Assume that you are managing a project team. Your team is one in which its members confront issues rather than people, establish procedures collectively, and is team oriented. As the project manager, which of the following represents your team's stage of development?
You are finalizing your project and after two years, you are ready to close it. Before doing so, you need to-
You are working on a project and want to identify the cause of problems you are having as you Control Scope. You wonder if you need to tailor some of the processes in your organization to better meet your project's ability to be a success. You realize in the area of Control Scope it is not necessary as-
You are working on a construction project in a city different from your headquarters' location. You and your team have not worked in this city, City B, previously, and you lack knowledge of the local building codes. You had a team member review the codes, and he said they were in far greater detail than those in your city, City A. In addition, your new project in City B is to take three years to complete and will use some unproven technology. Plus, your company wants you to follow agile, so you decided to collect requirements in user stories. In this situation, your best scheduling approach is-
Assume that you are managing a project that once completed will take your company into new markets. Since it is so significant, it has the interest of executive managers and other key internal stakeholders. You know for success, the marketing department will play a key role. You and your team identified them as key stakeholders. You met with the Chief Marketing Officer, and she indicated she would support the project. However, each time you have had a status review meeting with the executive group, except for the first meeting, the Chief Marketing Officer has not attended subsequent meetings. She also has not sent someone from her staff. This situation shows the importance of-
The nature of project work is such that it inevitably changes. You know this is the case on your software project as you were about 50% done when the company announced all software work was to be done using agile, even work in progress, and your project was using waterfall. You now believe it is time to ensure your stakeholders have not changed, and you want to monitor and assess stakeholder engagement levels. You decide to-
Communications develops the relationships for successful project outcomes. They can vary from short e-mails to formal meetings and presentations. There are two parts to successful communications. The first part is-
You are in the early stages of a project to manufacture disposable medical devices. You are preparing your schedule management plan for your project. As you do so, you plan to use-
You are managing a two-year project to transform your company, so it is more customer facing. No longer will work be done in silos, and instead, cross-functional teams will be used. The goal is the customer will know exactly whom to contact in the company with a question and will not have to make a number of calls to find the right person. Since this approach is one of the company's strategic priorities, the project management plan-
You are managing a two-year project to transform your company, so it is more customer facing. No longer will work be done in silos, and instead, cross-functional teams will be used. You are preparing your communications management plan. It should contain-
Obviously as a project manager, you will be making decisions throughout the project. A guideline for decision making is-
You and your sponsor are working on your project charter. It is important since you are working a totally functional organization, but for this project to be considered a success, you need people on your team that work in these functional departments. To make sure the functional managers will sign off on the charter and commit the resources you need at the time you need them, you decide to-
Your company has changed to an agile environment, and you are managing your first project using agile methods. After obtaining your certification in agile, you know through your studies of it plus the training your company provided that an effective way to Monitor Risks is to-
You are the project manager for a major logistics installation project and must obtain specific services from local sources external to your project. You are working now to prepare your project charter and decided to consult with some experts in-
Assume you are finally in the Close Project phase after almost two years on your project. You are holding a series of meetings, one of which is-
You are working on a project to upgrade the existing fiber-optic cables in your province. You have identified your stakeholders and now are preparing your stakeholder engagement plan. To assist you as you do so, you know your managers prefer visual representation of any possible information on any topic, so you decide to use-
You are working extremely hard to manage the engagement of your stakeholders. You hold extensive meetings with those whom you have classified as leading, so they can assist you in changing resistors to be at least neutral. You also are using a variety of forums to connect with them and to continually identify new stakeholders. You decided to adapt agile since it is a software project and hold sprint planning meetings plus daily stand-up meetings with your team. Lately, even though the team had been working well together, and you consider it to be in the performing stage for whatever reason, they now are storming, and team members are becoming resistant stakeholders. You need to-
You have had five contractors working for you on your legacy systems conversion project, which has taken two years. Finally, you have finished your work, users seem pleased with your results, and you are closing your project. However, before doing so, you need to close your contracts. This means you need to consider-
After two years, you developed a new approach to mentor people before they joined the company to determine if they would enjoy working there, and then if they were hired, you assigned a mentor to work with them. People seem pleased with the results of your work, and you now need to-
You decided to implement a team-based reward and recognition for your project, and the team members agreed in the project's ground rules that were established. However, while your sponsor liked the idea, the human resources department states individual performance appraisals must be done. It is now time to close the project. As the project manager, you decide to-
Your company is embarking on a project to launch a new product delivery service. You are the project manager for this project, and you have developed your charter working with your sponsor and some other key stakeholders. As you prepared your charter, you realized you also should prepare a(an)-
Assume you are working on a software project to implement a new warehouse management system. Since your team is collocated, your sponsor felt it was a perfect project to test whether agile methods are appropriate for the company. As you work to do this project, you realize it is necessary to-
You are preparing your project resource plan. In it, you will use some chart techniques to help determine resource requirements. As the project manager, you know it is your responsibility to spend time in acquiring, managing, motivating, and improving your team. You also know that-
Team building should be ongoing throughout the project life cycle. However, it is hard to maintain momentum and morale, especially on large, complex projects that span several years. One guideline to follow to promote team building is to-
You have been assigned as the project manager for a major project in your company where the customer and key supplier are located in another country. You have been working on your project for six months. Recently, you traveled to this country, and at the conclusion of a critical design review meeting, which was highly successful, you realized you were successful in building a high-performing team. You had your own team members, who work in a weak matrix structure, on a conference call during this meeting. Although it was difficult to reach agreement on some key issues, you therefore relied on your interpersonal skills in-
You feel fortunate to be assigned as the project manager on a multi-phase project that was requested by your company's key customer. It has the interest of the senior executives, and it was approved by the organization's portfolio oversight group. As you begin to work on this multi-phase project, a best practice is to-
Because risk management is relatively new on projects in your company, you decide to examine and document the effectiveness of the risk management process. You therefore-
Thinking back to lessons that your company learned from experiences with its legacy information systems during the Y2K dilemma, you finally convinced management to consider Software as a Service. You worked with your sponsor as you prepared your business case, and it was approved. Now you are working to develop your project charter. To ensure you are able to attain the key resources you need at the they are needed you recognize-
On your systems development project, you noted during a review that the system had less functionality than planned at the critical design review. For example, too many defects were identified. This finding suggests that during the Monitor Risks process you should use which following tools and techniques?
You have found as you Monitor Risks that some risks have not been closed, and some secondary risks have occurred but have not been documented. You decide you should-
Assume you are working on a mega project to upgrade every bridge in your state. You have outsourced most of the work given the estimated bridges of varying sizes approaches 3,000. You have 250 contractors, and many of them have some subcontractors. In this situation as the buyer, you realize-
A structured review of the seller's progress to deliver project scope and quality within cost and schedule is known as a(n)-
Within your company's portfolio, your project is ranked in the top five in terms of importance of the 60 projects under way. You are working in your construction company and now are preparing your quality management plan. While quality is critical to success, you are determining the cost of quality and have divided the costs into the costs of conformance and those of nonconformance. An example of a cost of nonconformance is-
Assume you are developing your project charter and decided to review enterprise environmental factors. An example is-
Each project is unique, and not all methodologies will fit every team. Assume you are managing your project to develop the world's largest wooden rollercoaster as a tourist attraction for your city. You are working to develop your team, so it is in the performing stage. As you review how resource management policies are used in your company, you realize you need to consider-
On your project as you prepare your stakeholder engagement plan, you decided it would be worthwhile to prepare a stakeholder engagement assessment matrix. You realized by doing so, you could-
Assume you are identifying your stakeholders. You want to use a threedimensional model, so you decide to-
Work completed, key performance indicators, technical performance measures, start and finish dates of schedule activities, number of change requests, number of defects, actual costs, and actual decisions are examples of work performance data, which are an output of-
Two team members on your current construction project are engaged in a major argument concerning the selection of project management software. They refuse to listen to each other. However, this conflict now is causing schedule delays. The most appropriate conflict resolution approach for you to use in this situation is-
You are preparing your project management plan to ensure the safety of camel milk in your country. As you prepare your project management plan, you want to ensure that the starting point for it is-
A key member of your project has deep technical skills and many years of experience in the company. However, she felt she should be the project manager. When you became the project manager instead, her morale deteriorated. You worked with her to obtain her ideas whenever there were issues and commended her work to others. But her morale is so low, and she is constantly complaining. Now you notice her morale is so poor that it is affecting other team members, and there are numerous negative conflicts you need to resolve. You have decided you need to reassign this staff member and have worked with your PMO manager to do so. Your next step is to-
You are performing a stakeholder analysis on your project, and you are working with your team to ensure you do not omit a key stakeholder. Your objective in doing this analysis is to-
Before considering a project closed, what document should be reviewed to ensure that project scope has been satisfied?
You have just been promoted to be a mega project manager in your company. The project will be using outsourcing, and some agreements are in place and signed. Your project is in three different locations. You want to be effective in controlling the procurements on your project. You decided to-
Although you have closed your project, you still have some outputs even though your deliverables have been met, the administrative closure tasks have been completed, and the project plan has met its objectives. You now need to-
You have a conflict on your team but have enough time to resolve it, and you want to maintain future relationships. Thankfully, there is mutual trust, respect, and confidence among the parties involved. You decide to use collaborating to resolve this conflict. In using this approach, your first step should be to-
You are working hard to make sure the guidelines in your communications management plan are not only followed but are used. You realize language is a major factor in communications activities, especially with global teams or teams that are comprised of people from different cultural groups. A first step in this process in Monitor Communications in this area is to-
Validate Scope works hand-in-hand with Control Quality and generally follows Control Quality. A tool and technique used in Validate Scope that is not used in Control Quality is-
Assume your project is considered to be extremely important to your company as it is for its top client. You have been given the authority to assign resources to the project as you set up your team. An important criterion is-
You are a goal-oriented project manager who is more interested in work accomplishment than relationship building. This indicates that you tend to resolve conflicts primarily through the use of-
You are working on a long-term project that has a number of benefits to its customers and users. Therefore, as the project manager, one of your first steps was to identify the stakeholders that were critical to project success. You decided to use focus group sessions, which are-
There are many different techniques for effective communications. As you know communications represents about 90% of the project manager's time, you want to select the most appropriate one to use. You decide to focus on-
Assume you and your team have prepared your risk management plan, identified, analyzed, and prepared your risk responses, and documented these data in your risk register. Now it is time to Implement Risk Responses. With all the planning you have done, it is time to manage the risks. You have decided that several agreed-upon risk responses were not implemented, and the risk occurred, but nothing was done. You realize the problem was the cost of implementing the response against the stakeholders' risk thresholds. Now you should-
The key output of Identify Stakeholders that documents identification information, assessment information, and classification is the-
An example of a tool and technique to create and connect people to information in Manage Project Knowledge is-
A key output from Estimate Costs-
A contract as a type of agreement typically is used when a project is being performed for an external customer. Agreements of all types are used as an input to-
As you prepare to close your project, which of the following is an input to the Close Project or Phase process?
Maintaining the scope baseline is the main benefit of the process of Control Scope. As you work to avoid scope creep on you project, you want to focus on determining the cause and degree of difference from this baseline and project performance. To do so, you decide to-
Assume you have been working with your sponsor to prepare you charter, and you plan to present it to your Steering Committee on Friday. You are managing a software project, and the business need stated that you should use agile for the first time in your company rather than waterfall. In the Develop Project Charter process, this is then-
Procurement documents are used in the Identify Stakeholder process because they-
You completed your stakeholder analysis. You also are working on a project that is small, and it is scheduled to last four months with a budget of $50,000 US. You have identified 30 stakeholders and now want to categorize them. You decide to-
Working on a two-year project, you know you will face a number of problems, gaps, inconsistencies, and conflicts. Having been a project manager for the last five years, you know they will occur unexpectedly and may affect project performance so, you decide to-
You are working on a project that needs approval from your City Council and the courts, because the project is one with significant environmental and social impacts. Although many consumer groups are advocates of this project, others are opposed to it. Hearings are scheduled to resolve these issues and to obtain the needed permits to proceed. In preparing your resource plan, you decide to designate a person as the court liaison, which is an example of a-
Assume you are managing an international project. Your team is located in Atlanta, Georgia, US; Berlin, Germany; and Melbourne, Australi
As a project manager, you recognize the importance of actively engaging key project stakeholders on a project. First however, as you identify your stakeholders, you should-
You decided as you prepare your communications management plan for your project to reorganize your organization to document in it fundamental activities of effective communications activities and develop effective communication artifacts that you need to-
As you prepare your project's quality management plan, you identified the various roles and responsibilities you need so your project achieves the customer's requirements, and they are satisfied with it. However, you work in a matrix organization, and you are concerned that even with your project charter, you may not have the needed resources available when you need them. Therefore, you realize-
You are managing a major international project that involves multiple teams in different locations. You are preparing your quality management plan for your project. The different people working in different geographic locations is a(n)-
Infrastructure and engineering projects are increasing since the economy has been stagnant except for the past six months. Many multi-billion dollar projects are common, and you are leading one for your company. Many procurements are international. As the seller, you want to-
You realize risk management is a continuous process in project management as it is impossible to identify all risks. However, even though every member of your 12-person team has had training in risk management, some of the planned responses were not implemented. As the project manager, you are trying to determine why it was not done as planned. You decide to-
Assume you issued a Request or Proposal to update a shopping center in your city. Once you issued it, but before you awarded an agreement, a number of sellers asked questions. You decide to-
Assume you are preparing your procurement management plan. One way to best manage and monitor the procurement is to-
Your project is considered to be one that is not predictable and has high variability. This is due to it being the first project in your aerospace company to venture into being a leader in space exploration and not just a bystander. Your firm is determined to lead the competition. In this environment as you plan needed resources for this project, you need-
Assume you are working on a complex project in your organization, which is in process of converting to agile methods. You are preparing your resource management plan and decided since agile is desired, a selforganizing team would be ideal. In such a team, you need to plan to-
While you have worked as a project manager for ten years, you are new to your current organization. In the past, your organization was informal in terms of plans to prepare and processes to follow. Your new organization, however, requires that each project have a resource management plan. You are unsure of the primary effort level required to meet the project's objectives. You decide to-
An intentional activity to ensure future performance of project work is aligned with the project management plan is-
There are numerous actions and activities as part of administrative closure to satisfy completion of exit criteria from a phase or when the project is closed. Assume on your project, you had four different contractors. To assist you as you close your project you-
As a project manager, not only must you be a leader, but you also must have outstanding skills in communicating. The importance of communications cannot be overstated even if you are working in an agile environment, which is what is used in your organization. Therefore, a key consideration is-
Assume you are managing a project, and your project management plan has been approved. Your project has a high level of change associated with it. There is active and ongoing stakeholder involvement. This means you probably are working with a(n)-
You are working to introduce formalized project management in your medical center, which is state-of-the-art. While it has done projects and has some under way, thus far they have been done in an ad hoc fashion. You were hired to move the center into a formal project management approach since you have your PMP, so you decided the best approach to demonstrate the value of project management was to use this culture change as a project. Now, you are preparing your project management plan. Because you know many people will resist this culture change, you decide to-
You are working to identify the stakeholders on your project. It is large and will last three years to develop a second location for your technology company. You know from academic research that-
Assume your project communication management plan has been approved by your sponsor and the members of your Steering Committee. You are managing a global project and have team members working virtually in four continents and stakeholders in numerous locations. Your next step is to-
Although your project team is working virtually, you are striving to make it a high-performing team. You held a virtual kickoff meeting to ensure there was a shared project vision. You now see that team members are addressing the work to be done, but they do not seem to be collaborating. You realize the team is-
Since your project is large and is to last three years to develop a second location for your technology company, you realize you have a large number of stakeholders, both positive and negative. You have completed your stakeholder analysis and have determined you have at least 155 stakeholders. Your next step is to categorize them, so you and your team spend your time later engaging with the key stakeholders that are critical to success. You decide to use-
Unknown unknowns seem to be more prevalent in environments and projects that are complex, seem to have many changes, and may be using destructive technologies. This means there is an increasing acceptance of these emergent risks leading to the need for project resilience on projects. Recognizing this may be the case on your complex project, you want to-
You realize that most people feel 'knowledge is power', it is hard to convince them that instead 'knowledge sharing is power'. Working on an innovative project that will last two years so your University can offer a PhD program in project management, you recognize you need to Manage Project Knowledge. As you work to do so, you should review the-
You are working to put in a high-speed railroad line for passengers in a densely populated area in your country. Its goal is to be fast and fun to ride. It will connect three cities that now by car can take approximately six hours to drive to from the first point to the last point. Since it is new, you will be outsourcing much of the work. You got a number of responses from sellers for this work and using your source selection criteria, you have selected the one you think will provide the best product. You now want to-
One key interpersonal skill used to Manage Stakeholder Expectations is-
You are a project manager leading the construction project of a new garbage incinerator. Local residents and environmental groups are opposed to this project because of its environmental impact. Management agrees with your request to partner with a third party that will be responsible for providing state-of-the-art "air scrubbers," to clean the exhaust to an acceptable level. This decision will delay the project but will allow it to continue. It shows you are using which risk response strategy?
After a year and a half, it is now time for you to close your construction project, and you had 15 contractors. First, you are working on closing procurements. For future lessons learned as you do so, you review the-
Working in the systems integration field, you are primarily responsible for coordinating the work of numerous contractors. Your current project is coming to an end, and you are closing it. You have 15 major contractors as well as a variety of other sellers. Now that you are closing contracts, you should-
Most projects focus on risks that are uncertain and may or may not occur, which are risks such as a seller is no longer in business, requirements change after the design is complete, or contractors want to change existing processes. However, increasingly in project management many projects also have to identify non-event risks. Assume you must do so on your project. An example of a non-event risk is-
You are identifying possible risks to your project concerning the development of a nutritional supplement. You want to aid your team in idea generation, so you decide to use-
Managing five contractors on your project for a new stadium in your City that can be used for baseball and for football and can be easily converted for either sport is a challenge along with managing your 15-person project team. You have prepared your communications management plan for this process, and you feel your team is finding it useful. Given the nature of this project and the numerous stakeholders involved, you want to ensure the planned communications activities and documents have the desired effect. You want to make sure-
You are awarding another contract to serve as an integration contract on your stadium project. It has generated a lot of interest from potential sellers, and you now expect a number of proposals. Since you have never managed or awarded a systems integration contract before, you need to upgrade your interpersonal skills in-
In Monitor Risk, a burndown chart is an example of-
Your firm specializes in roller-coaster construction. It plans to bid on a soon to be released RFP to build the world's most "death-defying" roller coaster. You know that such a roller coaster has never been built before, and that this would be a high-risk project. As the buyer, you are determining your source selection criteria, You decide to use-
Work performance information in Control Scope can include-
You want to ensure on your project that you focus on learning reviews before, during, and after the project. You are interested in the Manage Project Knowledge process as you believe your legacy conversion project will have a long-lasting impact on your company. These learning reviews are a(n)-
You recognize the importance of a lessons-learned register on any project. As you work to Manage Project Knowledge on your project to increase talent retention in your company, so there is less turnover and develop existing talent, a best practice to follow is to-
Products, services, and results in the marketplace are an input to which one of the following processes?
Each project can benefit from stakeholder involvement; however, it is in both the project manager's and the teams' best interest to ensure that all project stakeholders have positive attitudes toward the project and its goals and objectives. Working as a project manager, you have a number of key stakeholders on your project. The stakeholder who provides funds and/or resources to the project is the-
Assume you are managing a contract for your project for a new generation of nuclear missiles. You realize since this project is complex, and will last four years, during this time, you will acquire a lot of information. You want to Manage Project Knowledge, and in doing so, you to decide to plan project communication based on the project and that of your company. This interpersonal skill is-
Assume you are working to award an agreement as you develop an approach to make it easier to navigate all the various systems in the company to promote knowledge transfer. Before doing so, you should review the-
Your project is being conducted in a series of phases, and reviews are held to determine if the project has met the criteria to go forward to the next phase. Your executives decided to adopt this approach to make it easier to cancel a project if it no longer added business value to the company and before it began to cost too much to continue it. You just learned today your project passed the concept phase, and next is the test phase. Throughout the project you have found your lessons-learned register to be especially useful as you work to Manage Project Knowledge. It includes, among other things, the impact, actions, and the proposed actions associated with various situations. As you move to the test phase, it means-
Assume you are working for a major airline in your country. Your project is to increase the timeliness in boarding flights even if people have a lot of carry-on luggage and also to install free Wi-Fi regardless of where one sits in the plane. You have identified your stakeholders and prepared your stakeholder register. In your stakeholder register, you should include-
What is the first value in the Agile Manifesto?
Who were the creators of the Agile Manifesto?
In the Agile Manifesto, it is more important to respond to changes than to do which of the following?
Which of the following is the highest priority of the 12 major principles?
You are working to implement Agile in your organization, and a key stakeholder asks you to explain Agile to them. What would be the best answer to explain Agile to someone who doesn't know anything about it?
Bill is a key stakeholder in your organization and has recently learned about your usage of an Agile framework on your current project. You've invited Bill to a planning meeting, and he says, "I thought you didn't do formal planning in Agile." How should you respond?
Empirical process control has three main aspects to it. What would those three be?
In the past, your team has run projects using a more formal Waterfall method and now is incorporating Agile methodologies. What will be the biggest difference in how you manage your projects?
The Satir model correctly predicts why some organizations have a challenging time changing methodologies. What is the reason for that based on the model?
What is the main reason organizations should not jump into a hybrid method if they are new to Agile approaches?
Seventeen developers met in Snowbird, Utah, in February 2001 to discuss better ways of managing software projects. What was the result of that meeting?
What does the Agile Manifesto mean by "individuals and interactions over processes and tools"?
Which of the following best describes why Waterfall project management isn't the most effective way to manage software development projects?
Complete the rest of this statement from the Agile Manifesto: Individuals and interactions over .
Complete the rest of this statement from the Agile Manifesto: Responding to change over .
Complete the rest of this statement from the Agile Manifesto: Working software over .
Complete the rest of this statement from the Agile Manifesto: Customer collaboration over .
In the Declaration of Interdependence, which of the following increases by making continuous flow of value the focus?
What is the best way to explain Agile project teams based on the values of the Agile Manifesto?
Agile project teams work best in what dynamic?
Which of the following best describes Scrum?
Which of the following is not a Scrum artifact?
When is it an acceptable time to cancel a sprint in the middle of a project?
Which of the following is not a core value of XP?
Which of the following best practices are unique to eXtreme Programming?
One Scrum ceremony or activity is the team getting together to discuss what they will do today, what they did yesterday, and anything standing in their way. This is known as which of the following?
You are a Scrum Master, and you hear during a daily Scrum that your team is a bit behind schedule. The impediments they mention are having to do too many updates to stakeholders and too much paperwork. What is the best thing to do?
During your 15-minute stand-up meeting, two of your team members start discussing a solution to one of the issues that they ran into the day before. As the Scrum Master or Agile project manager, what should you do?
You are the product owner and have just started working on a new Agile team. One of the team members wants to know what your job entails. What do you tell them?
As an Agile project manager, you want your team to be which of the following?
You are a practicing Agile project manager, and you are explaining to your new team the value of retrospectives. What will the team understand about retrospectives once you have explained it to them?
As an Agile project manager, you explain to your team that, as their coach, you are there to provide for the team's needs and remove any roadblocks to their progress. This is also described as which of the following?
Which of the following items does your team need to produce a working, viable product or service?
Your customer is asking you to describe what you mean by self-organizing and selfmanaging teams. How would you describe them?
The basics of a stand-up meeting are to achieve which of the following?
Who is responsible for the product backlog?
Your new Scrum team is looking forward to practicing the time box methodologies of Scrum and Agile. When asked how long the stand-up meetings will be time-boxed for, what will you say?
You and the team are working with a visible master list of work to be done and are constantly reviewing and updating it with requirements that will be reorganized and reprioritized repeatedly. This is an example of which of the following?
Julie has just joined your organization as a new team member. She has heard of Agile as a concept and has a bit of Scrum experience, but she is confused about the sprint backlog and where it came from. What is an effective way to explain to Julie what the sprint backlog is?
Daily stand-up meetings or daily Scrums are designed to work through three questions. What did we do yesterday? What will we do today? Which of the following is the third question?
Why is using the MoSCoW Approach in DSDM so important?
The Pareto principle is seen in many project management and quality methodologies. Why is the principle so important to use when determining cause and effect?
Which of the following is a correct statement?
Other than defects, which of the following is included in the seven wastes of Lean software development?
Using Kanban methodology, which of the following is the best way to show performance and WIP to the team and to the customer?
Why is a pull system so important in the practice of Kanban?
Why was Feature-Driven Development created?
Which of the following is the best way to complete the sentence: In Crystal methods, increases with team size.
Mission focused, feature based, iterative, timeboxed, risk-driven, and are all characteristics of an ASD life cycle.
Your team is currently a bit behind schedule, and it is worried that it won't complete the work before the iteration ends. If you are practicing good servant leadership, what should you do first?
One of your team members comes to you with a problem about something that they are experiencing with key stakeholders on the project. They seem upset and are looking for you to provide some feedback. If you are actively listening to your team member, what thoughts should be running through your mind?
If you are leading an Agile team and spend most your time focusing on inspiring and collaborating with your team, what kind of leadership are you practicing?
The team space is key in Agile projects. What is the one thing that is recommended above all others for Agile teams?
On a colocated team, what is one of the major benefits of everyone sitting together in the same work space?
Leadership tasks are designed to help your team be most successful and to remove roadblocks preventing the team's success. Which of the following best describes this mindset?
What percentage of time should an Agile project manager spend communicating daily?
Lean was originally designed for which of the following?
Adaptive software development replaces with a repeating series of speculate, collaborate, and learn cycles:
One of your key stakeholders comes to you after a meeting and says, "I don't see you doing a lot of normal paperwork associated with project management. Instead, I see you talking to your team a lot. Why aren't you doing your management duties?" How would you respond to this statement?
A key stakeholder has asked for information on the team's progress through the iteration. What would be the best way to present information about team progress?
What would be the reasoning behind having an Iteration Zero?
You have colocated your team, and during the day the team discusses the things they have learned, what they are working on, and various solutions to issues they confront. Even though not everyone contributes to every conversation, they are picking up the information. This information can be internalized or thrown away depending on the individual's need for that information. This is known as which one of the following?
Which of the following items can your team use to help visually show what a viable product or service might look like in a type of low-fidelity prototype?
Your organization is working to determine a project to charter officially, and it is looking at various financial information for project selection. Which technique contains the most information necessary to make a final decision?
During a user story workshop, your customer says, "As a customer, I want a web page so that I can do business." Is this considered an effective user story?
During a user story workshop, you ask your customer to explain to you the result they are looking for in 140 characters or less. Which of the following are you requesting?
Kelly and Jim are working together on an architectural spike to help determine what process they will use. They have come to you as their Agile manager and expressed some frustration with the process. If you are practicing active listening, what would you be thinking as they expressed themselves?
How can you tell when you have a user story that isn't going to be effective?
You are a business analyst working to put together a business case utilizing project selection techniques. Project A has a net present value of $555,926 and Project B has a net present value of $787,454. Based on this information alone, which would you choose as the project to charter?
You are working with your customer and sketching out what their website will be like. This is an example of which one of the following?
You are working with a customer who is used to Waterfall frameworks and formal project charters. They ask you to explain the difference between a Waterfall project charter and an Agile project charter. How do you explain it to them?
You are working with your team to develop a persona, and one of your team members says that they were in the same position as your customer once and can understand where they are coming from. Your team member is expressing which of the following?
An effective user story follows which of the following formats?
A user story workshop is important because of which one of the following?
Payback period is a less effective way to determine ROI on a project because of which of the following reasons?
Your team is working to engage with your stakeholders, who are very interested in what your team thinks the eventual result will be. Your team works with the customer and draws out the web interface they are thinking of developing based on what the customer is describing. Which of the following wouldn't be involved in this process?
You are responding to a key stakeholder via email, and you decide that you will follow their lead and write with bullet points and sign your email in the same way as they do. This is an example of which kind of communication best practice?
If you received a project charter and it fully described the scope of work, milestones, risks, and key stakeholders, as well as budgetary estimates, would that be a good reflection of an Agile project charter?
You are in a meeting with a new customer to agree on requirements and basic starting points of the project. Your customer is going on and on about a long list of things that they want done, but they aren't really giving you a clear explanation of the project's end result. How can you encourage your customer to provide a clear, high-level explanation of the project's result?
Which of the following items does your team need in order to produce a working, viable product or service?
A persona is based on which one of the following?
Your team disagrees on the direction a requirement should take, and it is convinced that the customer hasn't explained it correctly. As a servant leader, what can you identify as the reason for the misunderstanding?
Bill and Ally are having a disagreement in the break room about something they saw on the news the night before. You are walking by, and you overhear the disagreement. As a servant leader, what is the best conflict resolution technique to utilize in this situation?
Your team has been working together for several iterations now, and they seem to be working well together. They are making decisions as a team and determining what work they should do and when. This is an example of which of the following?
As an Agile team member, you are working with the product owner and the customer on several of the user stories and requirements the customer is requesting. You witness the product owner suggesting that the customer choose one requirement over another because it will function better with their result, and the customer agrees that it is win-win for everyone. What did the product owner do effectively?
Task 5 of the exam content outline for stakeholder engagement states that you will need to establish collaborative behaviors among the members of the organization by fostering group decision making and conflict resolution in order to improve decision quality and reduce the time required to make decisions. If there is a conflict and you have an option, which of the following is the best conflict resolution strategy?
Your team has reached the performing phase. What types of management and leadership do they need?
Your newly formed team is experiencing some conflict in the way they estimate time. Several team members have withdrawn from the conversations, while others are still arguing about the best ways to do things. This is an example of what team stage?
As an Agile project manager, you explain to your team that, as their coach, you are there to provide for the team's needs and remove any roadblocks to their progress. This is also described as which one of the following?
Misunderstandings of value, product, and customer needs can best be described as which one of the following?
For an Agile project manager, active listening is an important aspect to practicing adaptive leadership. If a stakeholder is talking to you about an issue, what should be your primary focus?
Your stakeholders are engaged in a conversation about what direction to go in with an aspect of the software that is being built. The team is divided on how to proceed. The conflict is more of a collective disagreement than an outright conflict. What should you do as the Agile project manager?
One of your stakeholders is asking about your PMI-ACP certification and wonders what code of ethics you need to abide by as a certified professional. You explain that there are two categories of conduct you abide by. Which of the following describes these categories?
During a heated exchange over what the definition of done is to the stakeholders, you have determined that there isn't any way anyone is going to be able to collaborate on solutions. Which of the following conflict resolution strategies would work best in this situation?
In Maslow's hierarchy of needs, what term expresses a person who has everything and determines that they will give back for the greater good?
You and your development team are working with the product owner on user stories in the backlog. Your team is asking questions about what stories will be done next and what they think that they can accomplish. The product owner asks the team to consider adding two more stories to the sprint for the customer, and the team explains that they are unable to do any additional stories. The product owner explains why it is important, and the team agrees to take on one more story but not two. What does this exchange represent?
Engaging with stakeholders involves having the emotional intelligence to understand their concerns and to work to determine what they value. In order to be effective in this role, which of the following skills are necessary?
One of your stakeholders is new to Agile and is asking that the team take on more user stories per iteration to get things done faster. As an adaptive servant leader, what is the best thing to do?
You are a product owner, and you are working to sort various user stories by value during the current sprint. A key stakeholder comes to you in the middle of the current sprint and asks you to add a feature that was deemed unnecessary by the customer. What is the best thing to do?
Which of the following best describes a team's velocity from the first iteration on?
Your team has determined that there are 500 points of functionality left in the backlog to complete. The first four iterations' velocity has been tracked at 22 points 30 points 39 points 45 points Approximately, how many more iterations will it take to complete the project based on velocity?
Utilizing decision delays in an Agile environment allows teams to do all of the following, except .
The concept of ideal time is .
Which of the following represents a user story?
As a product owner, it is important to determine the priority of user stories that will be performed next. This is an example of which one of the following?
Decomposition of requirements could best be described by which of the following?
It is important for the Agile team to be able to see the "Big Picture" in a visual way. Which of the following would be the best tool for prioritization?
As an Agile project manager, you are tracking the team's work capacity and getting a sense of how much work is going to be done in the current iteration. What are you tracking?
Your team has been averaging 50 points' worth of work per iteration and has determined that there are 201 points left to complete. In how many iterations will the team complete the work?
Your team has stabilized their velocity throughout five iterations and commits to 15 story points in the current iteration. Due to a risk event during the iteration, the team only completed 14 story points. What happens to the leftover point?
Agile teams work with timeboxes. A customer asks, "What is the point of timeboxes in an iteration?" What do you say as an Agile project manager?
Your team is working with the customer on a brand-new project. The customer has established the primary scope of the work, but your team doesn't quite have a process intact. You suggest to the team that they run an iteration that allows for process discovery but doesn't yet deliver releasable value to the customer. This is otherwise known as which one of the following?
Your team is estimating that it will take two weeks for the next sprint if there aren't any interruptions to their work flow. Which of the following describes this estimate?
Whose position is it to determine the priority of user stories that will be performed next based on value?
You are working with a visible master list of work, and you are constantly reviewing and updating it with requirements that will be reorganized and reprioritized repeatedly. This is an example of which of the following?
You and your teammates are debating how long something should take to accomplish. Which of the following ways is the best way to estimate project work?
Your team is estimating work using planning poker. All team members agree that the work size is a 5, except for Bob. Bob thinks it should be a 10 in size. What could the reason be for this discrepancy?
How many sprints will it take to complete the work providing the team's current velocity is 10 points a sprint? Stories Points Priority A 3 points Priority B 6 points Priority C 4 points Priority D 10 points Priority E 3 points
Which of the following describes a generalized specialist?
The concept of Shu Ha Ri is one of .
The team space is key in Agile projects. What can be provided to the team in case they need privacy and quiet to work?
All the following are guidelines for one-on-one coaching except .
What is the main difference between a burn down and burn up chart?
Your team has determined that there are 500 points of functionality left in the backlog to complete. The first 4 iteration's velocity has been tracked as follows: 20 points 35 points 55 points 50 points Approximately how many more iterations will it take to complete the project based on velocity?
A key stakeholder has asked for information on the team's progression through the iteration. What would be the best way to present information about the team's progress?
Your key stakeholder is asking for comprehensive Gantt charts to determine how the project is progressing. What will you tell them?
Your team is colocated and has a common room to work and communicate. Bill is getting distracted while working on a specific line of code, and he has to have a private call with his doctor in a half hour. Bill gets up to go into another room to work privately and take the call with his doctor. Is this an acceptable practice for Agile teams?
You are working on a large project, and many of your team members are going to be virtually distributed. What is the best way to help your virtual team be successful for your upcoming project?
Of the following, what is the best way that you can help your team stay connected when they are virtual?
What is the following statement defining? Information flows into the background so that the team members will pick up relevant information that they can choose to learn more about or dismiss.
Your newly formed Agile team makes a mistake during the first iteration that results in 500 lines of code needing to be redone. As their coach, what do you think is important for the team to know?
A key stakeholder is asking what is the estimated time for the entire project to be completed. Which of the following will you show them to help answer that question?
An Agile team shows its progress visually and has created a specific chart/graph to show work that has been completed as well as make scope changes visible across iterations. What are they creating?
Who determines the process to prioritize value in an Agile project?
You are coaching your Agile team in different ways to prioritize value. Which one of the following would not be a way to prioritize?
During a prioritization exercise with your Agile team, you give each of the stakeholders 100 points. How will they determine priority with those points?
Your customer is describing items they want on the next release of their corporate software program. During discussions of valuable features, they ask if the software can include a new and innovative feature they read their competition may be creating. Your team performs Kano Analysis and determines this feature request falls under the category of:
Agile contracts differ from Waterfall projects in which of the following ways?
Your sponsor has asked you for a review of the scope, time, and cost performance so they can present the information to the shareholders. You have determined that the cost variance is -$3,000 and the schedule variance is $1,000. How is this project progressing?
Your organization is using a mix of Waterfall and Agile techniques on its project and is very focused on reaching the return on investment level that it has determined the project should meet. Your sponsor is asking for the cost performance index information. What technique can you use to provide that information?
The planned value on your current project at this point in the schedule is $10,000, and the earned value is $9,600. What is the schedule variance?
Your customer has been adamant about a certain feature being a part of the finished increment. You have explained time and again that the feature they are looking for will interfere with the rest of the result and cause it not to work as well. What could be the reason for this confusion?
You are being tasked by your organization to create a statement of work that will be utilized in the procurement process. The legal department explains to you that they want to make sure that all terms and conditions are negotiated and agreed to up front. Then, when scope needs to be changed, there is more flexibility in the process. To what type of agreement is the legal department referring?
Bill is the sponsor on your project and is especially nervous about the budget and meeting the expected ROI. He asks you on a regular basis what things are costing and if you are spending money in the right areas. You suggest to Bill that he come to the team area and explain where he would spend the money if it were his decision and he had the entire project budget to work with. What are you suggesting Bill do?
Your customer is working very closely with your team on prioritization of value for their product. There are certain items that must be in the final product no matter what and others that won't be included unless different information is presented at a later date. Which of the following prioritization techniques does it look like they used?
You are delivering a performance report to your sponsor on the project and have put together an earned value report. Your cost performance index is 1.25. What does that information tell your sponsor?
Your organization has entered into a contract that can best be described as good for the organization, and the budget requirements are known or stable. What kind of contract did your organization enter into?
Your project sponsor is asking for performance information on how your team is working in a new Agile environment, and you explain to them that your team is performing well together, that they have a good grasp on estimation techniques, and that their velocity has stabilized. These are all examples of what type of performance measurement?
Brenda is sitting down with you for some one-on-one coaching because she is having trouble setting goals that she can meet. You are working through the goals that she has set and notice that they seem rather vague, and it's hard to determine what the end result should be. What would you recommend to Brenda?
The mnemonic acronym SMART applies to which of the following project areas?
Jamal is the Agile project manager in charge of a new development project to create an app that can track how many times employees go to websites that are non-work related. Jamal is reporting to the sponsor that they have gone a bit over budget in the last iteration. Which of the following figures would show an over budget project?
Carol is writing down a goal she wants to meet. She starts with a very specific road map of what the result should be. She knows that she can get it done and has tracking mechanisms documented. Carol knows the goal is realistic as well. Which of the following is missing from her goal setting approach?
If you were going to calculate the schedule performance index for your sponsor, which of the following variables would you need to do that?
According to Kano analysis, what do exciters typically become once substantial time has passed?
When you're reviewing constraints on an Agile project, which of the following are considered not as flexible as others?
When determining return on investment (ROI) at the beginning of a project, most organizations use which of the following techniques to help build a business case?
Your team is holding a facilitated event in which the entire team will be given red and green stickers. The team will place red stickers on features that they don't want or like and green stickers on what they do want and like. This type of team event for decision making could be called which of the following?
Which of the following best describes progressive elaboration?
Agile teams incorporate rolling wave planning to do which one of the following?
Utilizing decision delays in an Agile environment allows teams to do all of the following except .
A risk has been identified in the first iteration. It's expected monetary value is projected at $45,000, and the value of the first feature is $23,000. If the risk can't be mitigated effectively and for less money, what could occur on the project?
A key stakeholder is asking what the overall risk situation is for the iteration. Which of the following will you show them to help answer that question?
Jim is new to your Agile team, and he is interested in how your team will be tracking scope of work completed and risk on the project. Which of the following type of chart or graph will you explain that you are using for both?
A risk event has been identified that will affect your current iteration. To investigate and determine ways to mitigate the risk, what will your team do?
During your daily stand-up meeting, Karen has pointed out a new impediment that is in her way. She is concerned that it may evolve into a risk event. After the meeting, Karen works with Peter to develop a story to reduce the impact of the risk event and wants to perform a risk-based spike. Which of the following represents the correct way to do the spike?
During a meeting with your sponsor, they bring up the fact that on your new Agile project your reporting has dropped off to the point where they barely have any information compared to Waterfall projects. How will you explain this to your sponsor?
Your current project has both value and risks to consider. In what order would the risk compared to value be placed to have a completed risk-adjusted backlog?
You are working with your team on a complicated software design. You really aren't sure if it is going to work, and at this point you aren't even sure if you can work it out in time to prove that you've determined the fix. What would be the best thing that you could suggest as their Agile PM?
Chris identified a new risk early in the first iteration. This is due to the use of the newest technologies and not much is known about how to solve it. What is the best thing for Chris to suggest in order to manage the situation?
Jamal is writing code that is easy to implement in the short run instead of applying the best overall solution at the time to get the code completed in time. What could be the outcome of this technique?
Gail is in the process of restructuring existing computer code without changing its behavior. Peter asks her what she is working on. How will Gail answer that question?
Your team is analyzing risk events and trying to determine what the "price tag" is going to be based on probability and impact. Which of the following techniques will provide that information?
Your Agile team is working on the fifth iteration of their project, and the sponsor is reviewing their risk burn down chart. How will the sponsor know if risk is being managed on the project?
Which of the following is a brainstorming technique designed to get to the bottom of something and provide a clearer solution to the issue?
As a product owner, you are reviewing the expected monetary value of identified risks and determining how to place the mitigation efforts into the backlog. Which of the following would go at the top of the list in a risk-adjusted backlog?
Sally is performing expected monetary value analysis on a newly identified risk. She has determined the probability is 30 percent and the impact is $10,000. What is the expected monetary value?
Three new risk events have been identified in your current iteration. Your analysis shows that two of the risk events' expected monetary value are higher than the features on which you are working, and one is not very impactful at all. What should you do if you are the product owner?
Your team is working together to brainstorm potential risk events on a project, and they are using a technique that allows them to focus on what is going well now versus what isn't going so well now. Which of the following tools are they using?
At the end of the day on Friday, you are attempting to wrap up your work and head home. Right in the middle of finishing a string of code, your computer crashes without saving all of your work. This is considered to be which one of the following?
You've just finished working on a long string of code, and as you review it, you realize that you have created the simplest thing that works but not necessarily the best solution. What are you creating for yourself?
A defect has been identified in the program you have worked on for the past three iterations. You aren't sure when the defect was created, but you know that the influencing factor was that someone else worked on earlier strings of the code while you were gone on vacation, which is a very common practice. What is the reason for the defect?
A risk event has just happened on your project. You work to implement the agreed-upon solution for mitigation and create a whole other risk event. This is known as which one of the following?
After working through two iterations with your Agile team, you've noticed that velocity is a bit lower than anticipated. During a daily stand-up meeting, one of the impediments that your team identifies is that the process seems bulky and more time-consuming than it needs to be. What would you suggest as a good way for the team to analyze the team processes for areas of improvement?
As an Agile project management expert, you know that the difference between lead time and cycle time is which one of the following?
Your team is working on a visual representation of their current process to determine if there is a better way to perform the process. With which of the following visual items are they working?
You are working on a Lean project. You have determined that you spend 50 minutes putting together a presentation that will last 20 minutes. What is the current calculated process cycle efficiency?
Your Agile team is in a scheduled timeboxed meeting and is asking questions like, "What should our product do?" "How could it fail?" "Why would it fail?" In what kind of meeting is your team participating?
Which of the following is the best way to answer the following questions? What should we stop doing? Start doing? Keep doing?
During the retrospective of your current sprint, your team seems to be all over the map in how they think things went. What is something that you can recommend to get to the bottom of the emotional reactions of the team?
What is the goal of a retrospective regardless of the techniques used?
During your retrospective, what is the most important thing that you as a coach can do to help your team reflect on the iteration?
Which of the following hybrid models of Agile is most common?
Your team is meeting during the early stages of the iteration to discuss some of the items that may go wrong in the iteration. Which of the following meetings are you conducting?
The Project Management Institute collaborated with which of the following organizations when developing its Agile Practice Guide?
Which of the following diagram types can show areas where issues have occurred, or may occur, and allow the team to adapt and adjust as needed?
Which of the following is the German term for pace or rhythm, and it is also used to help track performance on an Agile team?
Constraints are often called bottlenecks in production systems. Once the bottlenecks are removed, flow improves. This is an example of which of the following?
Jim is new to your team of developers and has a small amount of Agile experience. You have been tasked with explaining how your team is using a process flow called ScrumBan. How might you explain ScrumBan to Jim?
Any one of the team members can suggest that a meeting of the minds might be necessary to switch gears in the middle of an iteration. This is known as what type of meeting?
Your team is attempting to calculate their throughput. So far, they have completed three iterations. Iteration 1: 17 story points were completed. Iteration 2: 15 story points were completed. Iteration 3: 19 story points were completed. What is your team's current throughput?
Your team practices a Kanban approach to project management and prefers to use lead time rather than velocity to track performance. You are explaining this to a key stakeholder who isn't well versed in Agile. How would you explain the difference between lead time tracking and velocity tracking?
Large Scale Scrum, or LeSS, can best be described as which one of the following?
You work for a software development company that has followed the waterfall development model for more than 20 years. Lately, a number of customers have complained that your company is taking too long to complete its projects. You attended a class on agile development methods and believe that if the company used the agile approach, it could provide products to c lients in a shorter time period. However, it would be a major culture change to switch from the waterfall methodology to the agile approach and to train staff members in this new approach. You mentioned this idea to the director of the PMO, and although she liked the idea, she would need approval from the company's portfolio review board to move forward with it. She suggested that you document this idea in a-
You plan to hold a series of meeting as you execute the project plan. While different attendees will attend each meeting, a best practice to follow is to:
You have assembled a core team to develop the project management plan for the next generation of fatigue fighting drugs. The science is complex, and the extended team of researchers, clinicians, and patients for trials exceeds 500 people. The content of your project management plan will be directed primarily by two factors. They are-
You are beginning a new project staffed with a virtual team located across five countries. To help avoid conflict in work priorities among your team members and their functional managers, you ask the project sponsor to prepare a-
The purpose of economic value added (EVA) is to-
Facilitation techniques are used throughout project management. Your company is embarking on a project to completely eliminate defects in its products. You are the project manager for this project, and you are developing your project charter. To assist you, which of the following facilitation techniques did you use?
The direct and manage project work process truly is important in project management. It affects many other key processes and uses inputs from others. Working with your team at its kickoff meeting, you explain the key benefit of this process is to-
You are managing a project in an organization that is characterized by rigid rules and policies and strict supervisory controls. Your project, sponsored by your CEO who is new to the company, is to make the organization less bureaucratic and more participative. You are developing your project management plan. Given the organization as it now is set up, as you prepare your plan, you can use which of the following organizational process assets-
You are fairly new to managing a project but have been a team member for many years. You are pleased you were selected to manage your company's 2018 model line of hybrid vehicles. You are now planning your project and have been preparing the subsidiary plans as well. You realize some project documents also are required to help manage your project. An example of one that you believe will be especial helpful is the-
You work for a telecommunications company, and when developing a project management plan for a new project, you found that you must tailor some company processes because the product is so different than those products typically produced by your company. To tailor these processes, you will follow-
You realize that projects represent change, and on your projects, you always seem to have a number of change requests to consider. In your current project to manage the safety of the nation's cheese products and the testing methods used, you decided to prepare a formal change management plan. An often overlooked type of change request is-
You have been directed to establish a change control system for your company, but must convince your colleagues to use it. To be effective, the change control system must include-
Your cost control specialist has developed a budget plan for your project to add a second surgical center to the Children's Hospital. As you analyze cash flow requirements, you notice that cash flow activity is greatest in the closing phase. You find this unusual because on most projects the largest portion of the budget is spent-
You are project manager for a systems integration effort and need to procure the hardware components from external sources. Your subcontracts administrator has told you to prepare a product description, which is referenced in a-
You want to minimize the impact of changes on your project, yet you want to ensure that change is managed when and if it occurs. This can be done through each of the following ways EXCEPT-
All the following are project baselines that are generally part of the project management plan EXCEPT-
Working on your project management training curricula project, you decided it would be beneficial to you to become an active member of the Project Management Institute as part of the objectives of your project is to ensure it is aligned with PMI(R)'s best practices. To complement PMI(R)'s Work Breakdown Structure Practice Standard, you learned PMI(R) was requesting volunteers to participate in development of a similar standard on the Scope Statement. You volunteered, and now the Standard is issued. This is an example of-
Closing a project phase should not be delayed until project completion because-
Project management processes describe project work, while product-oriented management processes specify the project's product. Therefore, a project management process and a product-oriented management process-
The close project or phase process addresses actions and activities concerning all of the following EXCEPT-
Your project is proceeding according to schedule. You have just learned that a new regulatory requirement will cause a change in one of the project's performance specifications. To ensure that this change is incorporated into the project management plan, you should-
Different types of project phases are used on projects, and each phase culminates in the completion of at least one deliverable. The high-level nature of these phases means they are an element of the project life cycle. Some phases start before others complete. If this approach is followed, it may result in-
Oftentimes when a project is terminated, senior managers will replace the project manager with an individual who is skilled in closing out projects. If this is done, the first step for the termination manager should be to-
Projects are supposed to succeed, not fail. However, termination is an option to consider when all but which one of the following conditions exist?
All projects involve some extent of change, because they involve work that is unique in some fashion. Therefore, it is important that a project management plan includes a-
Alternatives generation often is useful in defining project scope. An example of a technique that can be used is-
Product analysis techniques include all the following EXCEPT-
The baseline for evaluating whether requests for changes or additional work are contained within or outside the project's exclusion is provided by the-
Rather than use a WBS, your team developed a bill of materials to define the project's work components. A customer review of this document uncovered that a scope change was needed, because a deliverable had not been defined, and a change request was written subsequently. This is an example of a change request that was the result of-
Collecting requirements is critical in project scope management as it becomes the foundation for the project's-
The project scope statement addresses and documents all the following items EXCEPT-
The first step in collecting requirements on any project, large or small, is to-
On the WBS, the first level of decomposition may be displayed by using all the following EXCEPT-
Change is inevitable on projects. Uncontrolled changes are often referred to as-
Each WBS component should be assigned a unique identifier from a code of accounts to-
In scope control it is important to determine the cause of any unacceptable variance relative to the scope baseline. This can be done through-
To assist your software development team in collecting requirements from potential users and to ensure that agreement about the stakeholders' needs exists early in the project, you decide to use a group creativity technique. Numerous techniques are available, but you and your team choose a voting process to rank the most useful ideas for further prioritization. This approach is known as-
You want to avoid scope creep on your project and are working hard to do so. Your sponsor has asked for regular reports as to how the project is performing according to the scope baseline. You should provide the sponsor with which one of the following-
You are leading a project team to identify potential new products for your organization. One idea was rejected by management because it would not fit with the organization's core competencies. You need to recommend other products using management's guideline as-
Any step recommended to bring expected future performance in line with the project management plan is called-
Updates of organizational process assets that are an output of Control Scope include all the following EXCEPT-
Work performance information in Validate Scope includes all the following EXCEPT-
Your project is now under way, and you are working with your team to prepare your requirements management plan. Which of the following strongly influences how requirements are managed?
You are the project manager on a systems engineering project designed to last six years and to develop the next-generation corvette for use in military operations. You and your team recognize that requirements may change as new technologies, especially in sonar systems, are developed. You are concerned that these new technologies may lead to changes in the scope of your product, which then will affect the scope of your project. Therefore your requirements traceability matrix should include tracing requirements to all the following project elements EXCEPT-
Your customer signed off on the requirements document and scope statement of your video game project last month. Today she stated she would like to make it an interactive game that can be played on a television and on a computer. This represents a requested scope change that, at a minimum-
The key inputs to the Validate Scope process include all the below items EXCEPT-
You and your team are documenting requirements on you project to control fatigue as people need to work more hours to keep up with the competition. You decided to set up components for the requirements on your project. Acceptance criteria are an example of-
Which following item is NOT an input to Control Scope?
You are the project manager for a subcontractor on a major contract. The prime contractor has asked that you manage your work in a detailed manner. Your first step is to-
Of the following tools and techniques, which one is NOT used for Control Schedule?
You are planning to conduct the team-building portion of your new project management training curriculum out-of-doors in the local park. You are limited to scheduling the course at certain times of the year, and the best time for the course to begin is mid-July. One of the more common date constraints to use as you develop the project schedule is-
Project schedule development is an iterative process. If the start and finish dates are not realistic, the project probably will not finish as planned. You are working with your team to define how to manage schedule changes. You documented your decisions in which of the following?
Your lead engineer estimates that a work package will most likely require 50 weeks to complete. It could be completed in 40 weeks if all goes well, but it could take 180 weeks in the worst case. What is the PERT estimate for the expected duration of the work package?
Working with your team to provide the basis for measuring and reporting schedule progress, you agree to use the-
You are remodeling your kitchen and decide to prepare a network diagram for this project. Your appliances must be purchased and available for installation by the time the cabinets are completed. In this example, these relationships are-
Decomposition is a technique used for both WBS development and activity definition. Which following statement best describes the role decomposition plays in activity definition as compared to creating the WBS?
When sequencing project activities in the schedule, all the following are true EXCEPT-
Various tools and techniques are available to sequence activities, and several factors can help to determine which tool or technique to select. When a project manager decides to include sub-networks or a fragment network as part of his or her scheduling technique, what does this decision say about the project?
Which one of the following is a key input to the Define Activities process?
Which of the following is a key benefit of Control Schedule?
It is important to use the critical path analysis in Control Schedule because-
All the following statements regarding critical chain method are true EXCEPT-
The risk register may need to be updated as an output of which following process?
You are managing a project to redesign a retail store layout to improve customer throughput and efficiency. Much project work must be done on site and will require the active participation of store employees who are life-long members of a powerful union with a reputation for labor unrest. One important component of your schedule must be-
To account for uncertainty in a schedule, reserve analysis may be used. All the following are examples of contingency reserves EXCEPT-
You have now prepared your cost management plan so now you are preparing your project's cost estimate. You decided to use analogous estimating. Which of the following is NOT a characteristic of analogous estimating?
All the following are outputs of the Estimate Costs process EXCEPT-
You must consider direct costs, indirect costs, overhead costs, and general and administrative costs during cost estimating. Which of the following is NOT an example of a direct cost?
You receive a frantic phone call from your vice president who says she is going to meet with a prospective client in 15 minutes to discuss a large and complex project. She asks you how much the project will cost. You quickly think of some similar past projects, factor in a few unknowns, and give her a number. What type of estimate did you just provide?
Which of the following is a tool for analyzing a design, determining its functions, and assessing how to provide those functions' cost effectively?
It is expensive to lease office space in cities around the world. Office space can cost approximately USD $80 per square foot in Tampa, Florid
There are a number of different earned value management rules of performance measurement that can be established as part of the cost management plan. Which one of the following is NOT an example of such a rule?
Typically, the statement "no one likes to estimate, because they know their estimate will be proven incorrect" is true. However, you have been given the challenge of estimating the costs for your nuclear reactor project. A basic assumption that you need to make early in this process is-
Performance review meetings are held to assess schedule activity and work packages over-running or under-running the budget and to determine any estimated funds needed to complete work in progress. Typically, if EV is being used, all but which of the following information is determined?
Assume you have used reserve analysis as a tool and technique to Control Costs. However, during this project you have focused on continual risk identification and subsequent analysis of the identified risks. In fact you had a risk expert on your team. This means you may need to-
Increased attention to return on investment (ROI) now requires you to reestimate the costs for your project. When you looked at how costs were first estimated, you realized an order-of-magnitude estimate was prepared, which was never refined. Therefore, now you are estimating costs from the beginning. This project is the development of a new smart TV and automated home, and you realize market conditions should be reviewed because-
Quality is very important to your company. Each project has a quality statement that is consistent with the organization's vision and mission. Both internal and external quality assurance are provided on all projects to-
In quality management, the practice "rework" is-
Requirements documentation is useful in project quality management because it-
Often, one quality tool may lead to the development of another useful quality tool. An example is-
Checksheets are one of the seven basic quality tools. Often overlooked is that the data about frequencies or consequences in checksheets-
Which of the following statements best describes attribute sampling versus variables sampling?
Your project scheduler has just started working with your project and has produced defect reports for the past two accounting cycles. If this continues, these defect reports could provide the potential for customer dissatisfaction and lost productivity that is due to rework. You discovered that the project scheduler needs additional training on using the scheduling tool that is used on your project. The cost of training falls under which one of the following categories?
It is important to use statistical sampling during Plan Quality Management in order to-
Rank ordering of defects should be used to guide corrective action. This is the underlying principle behind-
Project quality management was once thought to include only inspection or quality control. In recent years, the concept of project quality management has broadened. Which statement is NOT representative of the new definition of quality management?
Assume your organization is a start-up company, and you are trying to explain the importance of project quality management to the management team, which has not worked in this area before. You make an analogy to archery in your presentation, because one of the managers is an expert in it. You tell them arrows clustered tightly in one area of the target, even if they are not in the area of the bull's eye, have a high precision, but targets where the arrows are more spread out but are equidistant from the bull's eye are considered to have the same degree of accuracy. This analogy shows-
Using control charts is one way to monitor cost and schedule variances, volume, frequency of scope changes, and other results to determine if the project management processes are stable. Assume you are working on a project that implements a repetitive process because its result is used many times after the process is designed and tested in telecommunications. Since it is repetitive, the control limits are:
Projects tend to result in change, and people tend to resist change. Wanting to avoid resistance against the new manufacturing process that you are implementing, you-
Quality inspections also may be called-
You are managing a major international project, and your contract requires you to prepare both a project plan and a quality management plan. Your core team is preparing a project quality management plan. Your first step in developing this plan is to-
Recently your company introduced a new set of "metal woods" to its established line of golfing equipment. As you work in quality assurance on this project, you decide to use a matrix diagram as it-
An often overlooked function of a quality audit is to-
On-time performance, cost control, defect frequency, failure rates, availability, reliability, and test coverage are examples of-
Rework required, causes for rejection, and the need for process adjustment are examples of-
The control chart is a tool used primarily to help-
An often, but important, overlooked output of the Plan Quality Management process is the Process Improvement Plan. While its focus is on the steps to analyze project management and product development processes to identify activities to enhance their value, it also includes-
Basic quality management as defined in the PMBOK(R) Guide is intended to be compatible with the International Organization for Standardization (ISO) quality standards. This means that, among other things, every project should-
All but one of the following is objectives of a quality audit-
Quality checklists are an output of Plan Quality Management. These checklists-
Quality requirements of the project are recorded in-
The below Pareto chart indicates defects in areas associated with billing a client for project services. Based on this Pareto analysis, which area, or areas, indicate the greatest opportunity for improvement? 100 90 Number of Defects 80 70 60 50 40 30 20 10 0 e N te e r e de s e de nt r es be be at am at a ou Co Co dr tD lD R um um N m ly Ad ge C ai ip tN A ai PV M ce ar D nt un on Ch Re ou co Ph isc Ac D Defect Type
Correlation charts seek to explain a change in the dependent variable, Y, in relationship to a change in the corresponding independent variable, X. They are also known as a(n)-
The quality management plan should be reviewed early because-
You have been assigned as project manager on what could be a "bet the company" project. You realize that to be successful you need to exercise maximum control over project resources. Which form of project organization should you establish for this project?
Which of the following is a ground rule for project team building?
Project A is being administered using a matrix form of organization. The project manager reports to a senior vice president who provides visible support to the project. In this scenario, which of the following statements best describes the relative power of the project manager?
You are leading a team to recommend an equitable reward and recognition system for project managers. Before finalizing the plan, you want to ensure that executives understand the basic objective of reward systems. This objective is to-
Leadership is embedded in the job of a project manager and really in the job of every team member. Assume you are project manager with a team of three people who will work full-time on the project, and five people who will support the project on a part-time basis. All team members know one another and have worked together in the past. Leadership on this team is especially important-
Your organization is characterized by hierarchical organizational structures with rigid rules and policies and strict supervisory controls. Individual team members are not expected to engage in problem solving or use creative approaches to plan and execute work; management does that. Your organization is characterized by which one of the following theories?
As you prepare your human resource plan, you need to determine the skill and capacity required to complete the activities in the project. This should be documented in the-
The primary result of effective team development is-
The project team directory is an output from which of the following processes?
You realize that leadership without management or management without leadership probably will produce poor project results. Which one of the following key responsibilities best represents project leadership?
Given that you are neighbors, you and the CEO of your company have established a friendly personal relationship. Recently your company appointed you project manager for a new project that is crucial to achieving next year's financial targets. Which type of power available to project managers might you be able to rely upon?
You have been a project manager for seven years. You now are managing the construction of a new facility that must comply with the government's newly issued environmental standards. You want to ensure that your team members are able to select methods to complete various activities on the project without needing to involve you in each situation. As you prepare your human resource management plan, you should document this information in which of the following-
Conflicts are inevitable on projects, but if actually managed effectively, conflict can help a team arrive at a better solution. One of the biggest challenges a project manager faces is-
As project manager, you are primarily responsible for implementing the project management plan by authorizing the execution of project activities. Because you do not work in a projectized organization, you do not have direct access to human resource administrative activities. Therefore you need to-
Constant bickering, absenteeism, and substandard performance have characterized the behavior of certain members of your team. You have planned an off-site retreat for the team to engage in a variety of activities. Your primary objective for investing time and money in this event is to improve-
Which of the following is an enterprise environmental factor that may influence the development of the human resource management plan?
Your project has been under way for some time, and you are working in a matrix environment with only a few direct reports. However, it is your responsibility to-
You are part of a team that is working to develop a new medical implant device. Your project manager is an expert in medical implantation devices, yet he continually seeks opinions from the team about a wide variety of project and product issues. He is also a proponent of networking in order to-
The major difference between the project coordinator and project expeditor forms of organization is that-
Which one of the following represents a constraint on the Acquire Project Team process?
Selection criteria are often used as a tool and technique in Acquire Project Team. A multi-criteria decision tool is recommended. An example of a selection criterion is-
Your team of five people to develop a database to assess testing methods for listeria in ice cream has worked together before. You expect that this team will be a high-performing team from the beginning, but you find two team members seem to disagree as to the vision of the project. You meet with these two people and find one of them really dislikes being on the team. You decide to ask your sponsor if she can be reassigned, and another person added to the team. The sponsor agrees. This means-
A best practice in setting clear expectations regarding acceptable behavior by team members is to-
Attitude surveys, specific assessments, structured interviews, ability tests, and focus groups are examples of-
Work performance reports are especially helpful in the Manage Project Team process because-
The key way for a project manager to promote optimum team performance in project teams whose members are not colocated is to-
Hierarchical-type charts are a tool and technique for use in Plan Human Resource Management. Which one of the following is helpful in tracking project costs and can be aligned with the organization's accounting system?
A key benefit of the Plan Human Resource Management process is to determine the project organization chart. Therefore, an important first step is to-
A resource histogram is useful as part of the human resource management plan as it-
In addition to individual performance appraisals, team performance assessments are critical. Their evaluation may include indicators such as-
Having worked previously on projects as a team member, you are pleased to now be the project manager to develop a new process to ensure that software projects in your IT department are considered a success and are not late or over budget. However, many of your team members are new to the organization. As you work to establish a high-performing team, you realize the importance of-
As a project manager, you try to use empathic listening skills to help understand another person's frame of reference. In following this approach, you should-
Your CEO just sent you an e-mail asking you to make a presentation on your project, which has been in progress for 18 months, to over 50 identified internal and external stakeholders. You have been conducting such presentations and holding meetings regularly on this important project. You should begin by-
Project managers spend a great deal of time communicating with the team, the stakeholders, the client, and the sponsor. One can easily see the challenges involved, especially if one team member must communicate a technical concept to another team member in a different country. The first step in this process is to-
You finally have been appointed project manager for a major company project. One of your first activities as project manager will be to create the communications management plan. As you match the stakeholder with the appropriate communication methods for that stakeholder, you could use any one of the following methods EXCEPT-
A skill in negotiating is-
The key benefit of the Control Communications process is-
The issue log is useful in Control Communications because it-
A simple performance report provides information on-
Communication is important when setting and managing expectations with the stakeholders. Which one of the following statements is NOT true regarding the importance of communications within a project?
As an output from Control Communications, it may be necessary to update the-
Your organization has decided to use project management for all of its endeavors. It has established a Center of Excellence for Project Management to support the movement into management by projects and has appointed you as its director. Since you work in a matrix environment, which of the following types of communications is the most essential for success?
You have heard recently that the client calls your progress reports the "Code of Hammurabi" because they seem to be written in hieroglyphics and are completely indecipherable to all but an antiquities scholar. This situation could have been avoided by-
You want to ensure that the information you collect showing project progress and status is meaningful to stakeholders. You want to combine the type and format of the stakeholder's information needs with an analysis of the value of the information. You will document this information in the-
Assume you want to optimize the work performance reports you will use to manage communications. You should do so by-
Information received from stakeholders concerning project operations can be distributed and used to modify or improve future performance of the project. This modification or improvement is done as an update to organizational process assets during which of the following processes?
General management skills relevant to the Manage Communications process include-
Changes in the report formats and lessons learned documents process should trigger changes to the-
The purpose of work performance data in Control Communications is to present results of comparative analysis to the-
Because communications planning often is linked tightly with enterprise environmental factors, which one of the following statements is true?
You are working on a project with 15 stakeholders. The number of communication channels on this project is-
Which of the following formulas calculates the number of communication channels in a project? n(n 1)
As the project manager, you have the option of proposing one of three systems to a client: a full-feature system that not only satisfies the minimum requirements but also offers numerous special functions (the "Mercedes"); a system that meets the client's minimum requirements (the "Yugo"); and a system that satisfies the minimum requirements plus has a few extra features (the "Toyota"). The on-time records and associated profits and losses are depicted on the below decision tree. What is the expected monetary value of the "Toyota" system? Profit/loss me $100,000 On ti 60% r o b = P Late Pro b= 40% ($30,000) s de ce er M me $50,000 On ti 90% Toyota r o b = P Late Pro b= 10% ($10,000) Yu go me $10,000 On ti 99% b = Pro Late Pro b= 1% ($1000)
The risk urgency assessment is a tool and technique used for-
As project manager, you have assembled the team to prepare a comprehensive list of project risks. Which one of the following documents would be the most helpful in this process?
You are working on identifying possible risks to your project to develop a nutritional supplement. You want to develop a comprehensive list of risks that can be addressed later through qualitative and quantitative risk analysis. An information gathering technique used to identify risks is-
The Delphi technique is a particularly useful method for identifying risks to-
A workaround is-
In the below path convergence example, if the odds of completing activities 1, 2, and 3 on time are 50 percent, 50 percent, and 50 percent, what are the chances of starting activity 4 on day 6? Activity 1 5 days Start Activity 2 Activity 4 5 days Activity 3 5 days
A project health check identified a risk that your project would not be completed on time. As a result, you are quantifying the project's risk exposure and determining what cost and schedule contingency reserves might be needed. You performed a schedule risk analysis using Monte Carlo analysis. The basis for your schedule risk analysis is the-
You are developing radio frequency (RF) technology that will improve overnight package delivery. You ask each stakeholder to estimate the most optimistic package delivery time using the RF technology, the most pessimistic time, and the most likely time. This shows that for your next step you plan to-
Each one of the following statements about risk avoidance is true EXCEPT that it-
Your project team has identified all the risks on the project and has categorized them as high, medium, and low. The "low" risks are placed on which one of the following for monitoring?
A management reserve is used for-
You are managing the construction of a highly sophisticated data center in Port Moresby, Papua, New Guine
Which of the following is an example of recommended corrective action in risk management?
The primary advantage of using decision-tree analysis in project risk management is that it-
On a typical project, when are risks highest and the cost of changes the lowest?
In preparing the risk management plan meetings, the key purpose of these meetings is to-
Which one of the following statements best characterizes an activity cost or duration estimate developed with a limited amount of information?
What is the primary difference between a risk audit and a risk reassessment?
Accurate and unbiased data are essential for Perform Qualitative Risk Analysis. Which one of the following should you use to examine the extent of understanding of project risk?
Which of the following is NOT an objective of a risk audit?
Contingency planning involves-
Assume that you are working on a new product for your firm. Your CEO learned that a competitor was about to launch a new product that has similar features to those of your project. The competitor plans to launch the product on September 1. It is now March 1. Your schedule called for you to launch your product on December 1. Your CEO now has now mandated that you fast track your project so you can launch your product on August 1. This fast track schedule is an example of an-
Which term describes those costs in a contract that are associated with two or more projects but are not traceable to either of them individually?
In some cases, contract termination refers to-
Significant differences between the seller's price and your independent estimate may indicate all the following EXCEPT the-
You are a contractor for a state agency. Your company recently completed a water resource management project for the state and received payment on its final invoice today. A procurement audit has been conducted. Formal notification that the contract has been closed should be provided to your company by the-
Which term describes contract costs that are traceable to or caused by a specific project work effort?
You are awarding a contract to help develop a new feature in the eighth generation phone. You feel this feature will enable your company to outpace the competition. However, you know some potential sellers have worked for competitors in the past. As you select source selection criteria, you should include-
Which term is NOT a common name for a procurement document that solicits an offer from prospective sellers?
It is important to use a records management system on any project. In the procurement management process example of items to archive are-
Recent data indicate that more than 10,000 airline passengers are injured each year from baggage that falls from overhead bins. You performed a make-or-buy analysis and decided to outsource an improved bin design and manufacture it. The project team needs to develop a list of qualified sources. As a general rule, which method would the project team find especially helpful?
As you prepare to close out contracts on your project, you should review all the following types of documentation EXCEPT the-
You are working on a new project in your organization. You need to decide how best to staff the project and handle all its resource requirements. Your first step should be to-
Your company decided to award a contract for p roject management services on a pharmaceutical research project. Because your company is new to project management and does not understand the full scope of services that may be needed under the contract, it is most appropriate to award a-
Requirements for formal contract acceptance and closure usually are defined in the-
You plan to award a contract to provide project management training for your company. You decide it is important that any prospective contractor have an association with a major university that awards master's certificates in project management. This is an example of-
During the course of working with a seller that no one had worked with previously and is working on site with your team, inspections and audits can be conducted as you specified in the contract. You decided to hire an outside person, considered to be an expert in project management to conduct an audit. In doing so, it is important to note that-
You are responsible for ensuring that your seller's performance meets contractual requirements. For effective contract control, you should-
The primary benefit of contract control procurements is to ensure that-
An often-overlooked output to the Conduct Procurements process is-
Work performance data often are used In Control Procurements to show-
In the Plan Procurement Management process, potential sellers are evaluated, especially if the buyer wants to exercise some degree of influence or control over acquisition decisions. This means thought also should be given to-
Payment systems are a tool and technique in Control Procurements. They are typically processed by-
Assume before you award a contract, you and your team are striving to identify areas that may have more risk. You decide to concentrate on-
The best approach to resolve the settlement of all outstanding contract changes, claims, and disputes is using-
Assume on your project, you have a requested but unresolved change as you provided direction to the seller to take action. You consider this change to be one that is-
You are working on a complex project designed to combat glaucoma without the need to take eye drops. You are going to outsource part of the work to experts in the glaucoma field and have identified four sellers that have been judged to be in a competitive rage. These sellers and you have-
Assume you thought you would need to outsource part of your work on your telecom project. You conducted a make-or-buy analysis, and the decision was made not to outsource. This means-
You are managing a project with team members located at customer sites on three different continents. You have a number of stakeholders on your project, and most of them are located outside of the corporate office. Who should be responsible for stakeholder management?
Analyzing stakeholders is a part of the Identify Stakeholders process. Common approaches for analyzing stakeholders in a qualitative manner includes all the following two-axis grids, EXCEPT-
You are responsible for a project in your organization that has multiple internal customers. Because many people in your organization are interested in this project, you decide to prepare a stakeholder management strategy. Before preparing this strategy, you should-
Recognizing the importance of preparing a stakeholder management plan, you met with your team to obtain their buy in and to discuss it. You explained the key benefit of Plan Stakeholder Management is to-
Assume you are actively working, along with your team, to manage stakeholder engagement on your project to develop a new drug to prevent any retina problems of any type. You know you must manage their engagement throughout the project life cycle. This means some organizational process assets will need updating including-
As you work on your project to update its software training classes to focus on an agile approach, you have a number of key stakeholders. As many people and their managers are requesting these classes, your CEO has taken a special interest in your project and has asked you to accelerate your schedule to complete it in two months, rather than in your planned six months, and still have quality offerings. This means as you work to monitor overall project stakeholder relationships, you should-
As you work with your team to prepare your stakeholder management plan, you decided to develop a stakeholder engagement chart. You set it up so you can-
A number of items in the stakeholder management plan are similar to those in the communications management plan. An example is-
Having worked as a project manager for nine years, you know how important it is to identify the critical stakeholders and not to overlook anyone who has a major influence on your project, even if you do not ever plan to meet with or talk with this individual. As you work with your team, you explain the key benefit of the Identify Stakeholder Process is that it-
The last step in the stakeholder analysis process is to-
You realize that on projects, some stakeholders will not be as receptive as others to your project and actually can be negative from the beginning. Assume you have classified your stakeholders on your project designed to ensure students in your city have access to the best educational resources available, whether in class or on line. Your stakeholder management plan is a sensitive document. Therefore, you need to-
Work performance information is an output of Control Stakeholder Engagement. It includes a number of items, one of which is-
Assume you are managing the development of a construction project in your city to replace its five bridges so they are state of the art and meet updated safety standards because they originally were constructed 20 years ago. The design work has been completed. You have awarded subcontracts and are set to begin construction. Today your legal department told you to stop work as you had not consulted them, and there was a critical standard you overlooked during the design process. This example shows-
Assume your construction project is for a small city with only 8,500 people. There has been opposition by many residents to it from the beginning, when the city commissioners approved it. The residents recognize they will be severely impacted as the new bridges are implemented, and during the public hearings before the commissioners' decision, they hired an attorney to state they felt the more cost effective approach was to strengthen the bridges so they met today's safety requirements. Residents now know you have been ordered to stop work, and they have requested a meeting with the commission on Tuesday. This means you should-
In Plan Stakeholder Management, all organizational assets are used as inputs; however, which of the following are of particular importance?
Assume you have identified your stakeholders and are preparing your stakeholder management plan. You are fortunate that your team is a colocated team as you are working on an internal project to reorganize your IT Department so it is focused more on its customers. The project sponsor is the Chief Operating Officer, and the IT Department Director was surprised as she thought all was well. However, you notice when planning meetings are held, the Chief Financial Officer never attends. You believe that IT affects the entire company and therefore all the senior leaders need some type of involvement. You therefore feel the Chief Financial Officer may be-
Assume your stakeholder management plan has been approved. You now are working with your team to promote stakeholder engagement on your project. You explain in a team meeting its benefit is to-
You are a project manager working to foster stakeholder engagement, and you know a combination of interpersonal skills and general management skills is needed. An example of a key interpersonal skill in stakeholder engagement is-
Stakeholder engagement must be controlled on a continuous basis for it to be effective. You realize a number of project documents can be useful for you as a project manager. An example is-
Expert judgment is a best practice as a tool and technique in many project management processes, and the list of possible sources for experts varies by the organization and by its association with others. Once you have identified experts who you feel could be of assistance, you can-
Enterprise environmental factors are useful in many projects. In Plan Stakeholder Management an example of one of particular importance is-
Stakeholder management involves more than improving communications and requires more than just managing a team. This is because it-
Assume you are managing a project to implement an electronic medical record system in your ophthalmologist's office. You have been working to identify your stakeholders to then make sure everyone is committed to it as some people have been working in this office for more than 20 years and are comfortable with the manual approach. At this point, you have documented assessment information, which includes-
Having prepared stakeholder management plans on previous projects, you know it is positive to review the project management plan because it-
Assume you have performed your stakeholder analysis and now are working to enhance it with a stakeholder engagement assessment matrix. Such a matrix shows the stakeholder's current engagement level. These data enable-
The ability of stakeholders to influence a project is-
Working on your project to design and construct five new bridges for your City, you are striving to actively manage the stakeholders on your project, especially those who will be inconvenienced by the project and have indicated they do not support it. You decided to review your communications management plan as it-
A supporting input for controlling stakeholder engagement is-
As a result of the Control Stakeholder Engagement process, you realize even though this process is under way until the closing phase that you have identified the root cause of some issues you have faced in controlling stakeholders expectations. You should therefore-
Identifying interrelationships and potential overlap between stakeholders is useful to the project manager as he or she works with stakeholders. It should be documented as part of the-
A number of organizational process assets are useful as inputs to the Manage Stakeholder Engagement process. Similarly a number of organizational process assets require updates because of this process. An example of one that is an input is-
Table reporting, spreadsheet analysis, and presentations are examples of-
You recently took over a relatively new project expected to last another seven years. The previous project manager completed some of the WBS. When you begin to define the project activities, you realize that the WBS work packages expected to occur in the next year are planned in detail, but the work packages for later in the future (three years or more) are not planned with much detail, if any detail at all. You determine-
You are managing a project to transform your organization into one that is more customer centric as your executives realize they no longer can assume existing customers will stay with your firm given offerings by the competition. You and your team identified over 300 stakeholders and classified them. You realize 45 are influential but negative to the project. You then prepared your stakeholder management plan. Now, you find you are addressing concerns from these stakeholders plus others, and it consumes most of your time. However, it is important because-
On your project to construct a new runway for your City's airport, you are in the process of selecting vendors for various parts of this project. You have conducted your make-or-buy analysis and have issued Requests for Proposals. You believe it is important to examine the readiness of the vendor to provide the desired end state. This means you are using-
Requirements typically are classified into product requirements and project requirements. Capturing and managing both types of requirements is important for project success, so you and your team decided to follow this classification system on your project to modernize all the telecommunications equipment in your company. During such an approach, all the following are examples of solution requirements EXCEPT-
Change control procedures, configuration management knowledge base, versions, and baselines in the Develop Project Management Plan process are:
The performance measurement baseline consists of all the following EXCEPT-
In addition to providing support to the project, quality assurance also provides an umbrella for-
Assume that you are managing a project in which 80% has been outsourced to various sellers. In terms of contract administration, a key aspect is
If you apply the configuration management system along with change control processes project wide, you will achieve all but one of the which following objectives?
You need to outsource the testing function of your project. Your subcontracts department informed you that the following document must be prepared before conducting the procurement:
Constraints common to projects include-
You are developing a project charter, and it requires first that a business case be prepared to make a decision to go ahead with a project Your project is to lessen the environmental impact of a landfill so its business case is created primarily as a result of a(n)-
A number of tools and techniques are helpful in the Perform Integrated Change Control process. If you want to implement an integrated change control process, you should use-
You are working on a complex project in the medical device field. You have about 55 internal stakeholders and a very large number of external stakeholders including regulatory and consumer interest groups along with the medical profession. You need to be aware of their risk tolerances as they are examples in the Direct and Manage Project Work process of-
Which of the following is focused on the specification of both the deliverables and the processes as part of the Perform Integrated Change Control process?
Which of the following tools is used in process analysis to determine the underlying causes of defects?
All of the following statements concerning Validate Scope and Control Quality are true EXCEPT-
There are a number of activities that must be done to close a project or a phase. They are step-by-step methodologies. The first one addresses-
You are in the process of performing quality assurance on your product and find that some requirements are not as complete as they should be, which causes rework and adds costs to your overall project. One approach to determine your next steps is-
The project scope baseline should be used in the Identify Risks process because it-
Although there are various tools and techniques to consider as you collect requirements on your project, one approach that supports the concept of progressive elaboration is-
Data from which of the following are used to Perform Quality Assurance?
The key management skills required during the adjourning stage of team development include all but which one of the following?
The key to effective cost control is-
Project deliverables are the outputs that include the product, service, or result of the project as well as ancillary results. These ancillary results should be in the-
After the project scope statement is complete, it may be necessary to update other project documents. All the following are examples of a document that may require updates EXCEPT-
While managing a large project in your organization, you realize that your project team requires training in contract administration because you will be awarding several major subcontracts. After you analyze your project requirements and assess the expertise of your team members, you decide that your team will need a one-week class in contract administration. This training should-
Your company has been awarded a contract for project management consulting services for a major government agency. You were a member of the proposal writing team, are PMP(R) certified, and you are the project manager. You are now working to prepare your project management plan, which is to be submitted in one week. You decided to use some facilitation techniques to help develop your plan. While a number are possible, you selected-
Rolling wave planning in the Create WBS process refers to situations in which-
You are pleased to be the project manager for a new video conferencing system for your global organization. You want it to be one that is easy to use and is state of the art. As the project manager, you also are the project leader. You realize leadership is critical throughout the phases of the project and its key elements are-
The WBS represents all product and project work, including project management. It is sometimes called the-
Your company is in the project management training business. In addition, the company publishes several exam study aids for the PMP(R) and CAPM(R) exam. You have your PMP(R), and you have been appointed as the project manager to make sure your company's training materials are updated to be aligned with the new PMBOK(R) Guide. You must complete your project in six months. You are now in month four. Many of your team members have been working on other projects as the company uses matrix management. In a performance review meeting today, you informed your Governance Board that you did not think you could complete this project in the remaining two months. You were informed that additional resources were not available, but you had to complete your project on time. Your best course of action is to-
Motivation is dynamic and complex. The overall success of the project depends on the team's commitment to it, which is directly related to motivation. On your project, you want to create an environment to meet project objectives, but you want to motivate your team members by providing them with what they value the most. An example of a value is-
You work for an electrical utility company and will be managing a project to build a new substation that will serve a new industrial park. This project was authorized because of a-
At the time the risk register is first prepared, it should contain-
You are following a collaborative approach as you lead you team and are conducting a team performance assessment in addition to individual assessments. The performance of a successful team is measured in terms of-
Your project is considered very risky. You plan to perform numerous what-if scenarios on your schedule using simulation software that will define each schedule activity and calculate a range of possible durations for each activity. The simulation then will use the collected data from each activity to calculate a distribution curve (or range) for the possible outcomes of the total project. Your planned approach is an example of which following technique?
Project execution must be compared, and deviations must be measured for management control according to the-
A number of items may be part of the schedule data for the project. The amount of additional detail will vary, but the data should include all the following items EXCEPT-
Lessons learned are important throughout project management. Assume you have documented them as you updated the organizational process assets in the Manage Stakeholder Engagement process. An example of one to include in this process is-
Which tool or technique is NOT used for Control Schedule control?
As stakeholders engage with the project, the overall effectiveness of the stakeholder management strategy can be evaluated. As the project manager, this means you should-
Recording and reporting information regarding when appropriate configuration information should be provided and regarding the status of proposed and approved changes effectively is done through-
Decomposition is a technique used to break larger, complex items into smaller and more manageable items. Which following statement best describes the role d ecomposition plays in creating the WBS?
The schedule can be presented in a number of formats. Assume your stakeholders want to see it as a time-scaled logic diagram. This-
Activity attributes are used to extend the description of the activity and to identify its multiple components. In the early stages of the project, an example of an activity a ttribute is-
Your project has a budget of $1.5 million for the first year, $3 million for the second year, $2.2 million for the third year, and $800,000 for the fourth year. Most of the project budget will be spent during-
If you decide to follow an open subordination approach to resolving conflict, you are using which style of conflict resolution?
Typically, the seller receives formal written notice that the contract has been completed by the-
You are working in the Control Procurements process and your project is using five contractors. You need to update a number of organizational process assets. An example is-
To anticipate and help develop approaches to deal with potential quality problems on your project, you want to use a variety of root-cause analysis techniques including all the following approaches EXCEPT-
All of the following are examples of ways to generate options for mutual gain during negotiations EXCEPT-
Recently, your company introduced a new processing system for its products. You were the project manager for this system and now have been asked to lead a team to implement needed changes to increase efficiency and productivity. To help you analyze the process outputs, you and your team have decided to use which following technique?
As the project manager, you are negotiating with functional managers and other project managers to staff your project with the required levels of expertise. To determine the most appropriate criteria to select your team, you decided to use-
Based on quality control measurements on your manufacturing project, management realizes that immediate corrective action is required to the material requirements planning (MRP) system to minimize rework. To implement the necessary changes you should follow-
You are the project manager on a project to improve traffic flow in the company's parking garage. You decide to use flowcharting to-
Recognizing the importance of people on projects, you are preparing your human resource management plan. You decide to take a look at the organizational process assets so you review-
Schedule control is one important way to avoid delays. While planning and executing schedule recovery, one tool available to you to control the schedule is-
In which of the following methods of resolving conflict will the conflict typically reappear again in another form?
Statistical sampling is a method in Control Quality to determine the conformance to requirements for some component or product of a project. Its greatest advantage is that it-
Your project sponsor wants to know whether process variables are within acceptable limits. To answer this question, you should-
You are preparing your cost estimate for your project in robotics. Already, some competitors have learned about this project, and they want to be possible purchasers of the project when it is complete. You consider this to be an opportunity, which means-
You are planning a project and want to account for how the project will be managed in the future. While building your cost performance data, you want to provide guidance for when the project is later executed, because you know that different responses are required depending upon the degree of variance from the baseline. For example, a variance of 10 percent might not require immediate action, whereas a variance of 20 percent will require more immediate action and investigation. You decide to include the details of how to manage the cost variances as part of which following plan?
Assume that you are managing a project team. Your team is one in which its members confront issues rather than people, establish procedures collectively, and is team oriented. As the project manager, which of the following represents your team's stage of development and the approach you should use during this time?
You are finalizing all the contracts and ensuring that they are closed. The Close Procurements process involves all the following administrative actions EXCEPT-
You are working on a project and want to identify the cause of problems in a process by the shape and width of the distribution of the process variables. You should use a-
You are working on a construction project in a city different from your headquarters' location. You and your team have not worked in this city, City B, previously, and you lack knowledge of the local building codes. You had a team member review the codes, and he said they were in far greater detail than those in your city, City A. When you asked him how much time he would need to spend to gain a complete understanding of these codes, he estimated that at least five weeks would be needed. You then decided it would be more cost effective to hire a local person from City B who specializes in this are
Assume that you are managing a project that once completed will take you company into new markets. Since it is so significant it has the interest of executive managers and other key internal stakeholders. You know for success, the marketing department will play a key role. You and your team identified them as key stakeholders. You met with the Chief Marketing Officer, and she indicated she would support the project. However, the Chef Marketing Officer has attended only the first status review meeting but none of the subsequent meetings. She also has not sent someone from her staff. This situation shows the importance of-
The nature of project work is such that it inevitably changes. You know this is the case on your software project as you were about 50% done when the company announced all software work was to be done using agile, even work in progress, and your project was using waterfall. You now believe it is time to ensure your stakeholders have not changed, and you want to reassess them to make sure you do not have new stakeholders or have ones whose positions have changed. You decide to-
Assume you are working as the project manager on the first project in your company to use the critical chain approach to scheduling. You are a PMP(R) and also are certified in critical chain. You are getting ready for a performance review with your Governance Board, and you expect they will ask questions about-
You are in the early stages of a project to manufacture disposable medical devices. You need a number of engineers including ones with specialties in mechanical, environmental, and systems engineering. In the early stages of this project, your resource pool includes a large number of both junior and senior engineers in the various specialty areas. However, as the project progresses-
A number of approaches can be helpful when estimating resource requirements for activities on a project. Assume you are managing a project and you have already prepared your WBS. When you decomposed your WBS, it had work packages. You then prepared an activity list. Now, you are preparing your schedule and determining your resource requirements. You found there were about 30 activities that you could not estimate with a reasonable degree of confidence, so you and your team decided to use which one of the following approaches to help with these activity resource estimates:
To practice effective schedule control, your project team must be alert to any issues that may cause problems in the future. To best accomplish effective schedule control, the team should-
You recognize the importance of the project charter, and it has a number of key benefits including-
A watch list of low priority risks is documented in the-
You are the project manager for a major logistics installation project and must obtain specific services from local sources external to your project. Your subcontracts administrator has told you to prepare a product or service description, which is referenced in a-
You are working on a project to upgrade the existing fiber-optic cables in your province. You have determined that a resource can install 25 meters of cable per hour, so the duration required to install 1,000 meters would be 40 hours. This means you are using-
During the stages of team development, your team is in which stage when there is problem solving and interdependence along with achievement and synergy?
When you are about to terminate a contract, the one place to look for specific procedures for contract closure is in the-
Assume even though you are the seller, you have asked the buyer to terminate your contract for convenience. You and your team believe, based on the work done so far, you will not be able to satisfy the buyer. You added staff members even though it was a fixed-price contract, but still your deliverables are being rejected. You and your team are in shock, but the buyer agrees. Now, the buyer is working to terminate the contract for convenience. As the buyer one should-
You decided to implement a team-based reward and recognition for your project, and the team members agreed on the project's ground rules that were established. However, while your sponsor liked the idea, the human resources department states individual performance appraisals must be done. As the project manager, you do so-
Your company is embarking on a project to launch a new product delivery service. You are the project manager for this project and have just finished the concept phase. The various outputs/deliverable(s) for this phase include-
As you work in the executing process, and especially in the Direct and Manage Project Work process, the majority of the project's work is being completed. As an output, you know you need to update a number of project documents, one of which is the-
You are managing a project in which your team members all work in the same geographic location and have worked together previously on many projects. Everyone is aware of the various strengths and weaknesses of the individual team members and their key areas of expertise. As a result-
Because risk management is relatively new on projects in your company, you decide to examine and document the effectiveness of risk responses in dealing with identified risks and their root causes. You therefore-
Thinking back to lessons that your company learned from experiences with its legacy information systems during the Y2K dilemma, you finally convinced management to consider systems maintenance from the beginning of the project. However, maintenance should-
On your systems development project, you noted during a review that the system had less functionality than planned at the critical design review. This note suggests that during the Control Risks process you used which following tools and techniques?
The workaround that you used to deal with a risk that occurred should be documented and included in which following processes?
Contested changes are requested changes when the buyer and seller cannot agree on compensation for the change. They are also known as all but which one of the following?
Within your company's portfolio, your project is ranked in the top five in terms of importance of the 60 projects under way; however, the number of resources available to you is still limited. You have decided to pilot test the use of critical chain on your project. You have calculated your critical path. You want to ensure that your target finish date does not slip in the critical chain method. To do so you should-
A team-building approach that facilitates a sense of community is-
On your project you decided it would be worthwhile to prepare a stakeholder engagement matrix. You felt this matrix would help show gaps between the current and the desired engagement levels of your project's stakeholders. After you prepared this matrix, you decided to work with your team to determine actions and communications required to close the identified gaps. You did so by-
Historical information is used-
Work completed, key performance indicators, technical performance measures, start and finish dates of schedule activities, number of change requests, number of defects, actual costs, and actual decisions are examples of work performance data output of-
Two team members on your current construction project are engaged in a major argument concerning the selection of project management software. They refuse to listen to each other. The most appropriate conflict resolution approach for you to use in this situation is-
As you use the critical chain method in lieu of the criticalpath method in developing your schedule, assume you have determined the buffer schedule activities. Your planned activities are scheduled to their latest possible planed start and end dates. Therefore, you are focusing on-
You are performing a stakeholder analysis on your project, and you are working with your team to ensure you do not omit a key stakeholder. Your first step should be to-
A cost management plan should establish and document the various earned value rules of performance measurement. Along with defining the WBS to the level that the earned value analysis will be performed and establishing how earned value will be credited to the project (0-100, 0-50-100, and so on), which following rule is also recognized regarding performance measurement?
All the following elements are organizational processasset updates, resulting from closing a project or phase EXCEPT-
You have a conflict on your team but have enough time to resolve it, and you want to maintain future relationships. Thankfully, there is mutual trust, respect, and confidence among the parties involved. You decide to use confronting to resolve this conflict. In using this approach, your first step should be to-
One way to evaluate the project schedule performance is to-
You are working on a long-term project that has a number of benefits to its customers and users. Therefore, as the project manager, one of your first steps was to identify the stakeholders that were critical to project success. Because this project will need long-term support by your organization once it is completed, key stakeholders are-
Effective communication occurs in groups as well as between individuals and is made up of several key components, such as the purpose of the message, the audience that you are delivering the message to, and the content of the message itself. One important area to consider when working with manage communications-
A conflict resolution approach that is NOT considered to be very effective when more than a few players are involved and their viewpoints are mutually exclusive is-
Improvement to the processes and the product is a goal of project quality management. Assume that after completing a quality audit, you have discovered some gaps/shortcomings in the way that the project team is completing one deliverable. As an output to Perform Quality Assurance, you would create which of the following item that feeds directly into the Perform Integrated Change Control processes?
The Estimate Costs process uses all the following tools and techniques EXCEPT-
A contract is a type of agreement, typically used when a project is being performed for an external customer. Agreements of all types are used as an input to-
Managing change to the scope baseline is the main benefit of the process of Control Scope. As you work to avoid scope creep on you project, you want to focus on determining the cause and degree of difference from this baseline and project performance. To do so, you decide to-
You completed your stakeholder analysis. How do you want to manage those stakeholders that have a high interest in your project and high power over decisions affecting your project?
Change requests include a group of potential changes to a project. Types of change requests include all the following EXCEPT-
You are working on a project that needs approval from your City Council and the courts, because the project is one with significant environmental and social impacts. Although many consumer groups are advocates of this project, others are opposed to it. Hearings are scheduled to resolve these issues and to obtain the needed permits to proceed. In preparing your human resource plan, you decide to designate a person as the court liaison, which is an example of a-
As a project manager, you recognize the importance of actively engaging key project stakeholders on a project. You have prepared an analysis of your stakeholders early in your project and classified them according to their interest, influence, and involvement in your project. You want to now-
As you prepare your human resource management plan for your project, you have decided to document the roles and responsibilities of your eight team members. You have looked at some formats to use and find most are in the form of an organization chart, the responsibility chart or matrix, or a role description in text format. However, regardless of the format, the emphasis is to-
The Plan Quality Management process includes all the following techniques EXCEPT-
You are managing a major international project that involves multiple performing organizations. To establish the guiding rules for the project regarding quality, you and your project team must develop a-
You are working on a project that management has decided to terminate early, because the product was rendered obsolete by the introduction of new technology by a competitor. You have awarded a contract for part of the project that will be terminated, and fortunately have a clause that enables you to terminate it for convenience at any time. This means that-
Of the following, which one is NOT true concerning an agreement?
All of the following can be used in lieu of the term "bidders conferences" EXCEPT-
Assume you are preparing your procurement management plan. A useful tool and technique is to-
Your role in the project includes helping to resolve problems; making recommendations regarding priorities; accelerating activities to meet the target schedule; promoting communications among project team members; and helping management monitor the project's progress on a regular basis. Most of the people working on your project are scientists or technical experts. You are working in which of the following types of organizational structures?
Assume you are working on a complex project in your organization, and it involves in-house staff, as well as contractors. Some of your team members work in different locations. At first, the team members did not really understand their roles and responsibilities and were not that committed to the project. To avoid cost and schedule overruns, you learned you needed to have a lot of meetings with your team to obtain their buy-in and use more of a command and control leadership approach. Now, however, a year has passed, and the project is on schedule and within budget. There is greater trust among the team members. You have learned since this team is more mature that you-
While you have worked as a project manager for ten years, you are new to your current organization. In the past, your organization was informal in terms of plans to prepare and processes to follow. Your new organization, however, requires that each project have a human resource management plan. You are unsure of the reporting relationships that need to be followed. You decide to-
Close procurements is a process that involves includes activities for administrative closure such as-
As a project manager, not only must you be a leader, but you also must have outstanding skills in communicating because research over the years shows project managers spend about 90% of their time communicating. You are working to create, collect, distribute, store, retrieve, and ultimately dispose of project information as described in your communications management plan. The benefit of this work is-
One way to help mitigate personnel risks that may occur during the project is to-
You are conducting a stakeholder analysis on your project. After identifying potential stakeholders, the next step in the process is to-
You are conducting a stakeholder analysis on your project. Your organization uses an approach to classify stakeholders based on their level of authority and their active involvement in the project. This approach is known as-
When managing projects, one important technique is capturing lessons learned from previous projects to improve the organization's project management process. Therefore, assume you are working to identify possible risks to your project, and there are numerous techniques to use but you should consider-
Failure to meet quality requirements can have serious, negative effect for a project and its stakeholders. Therefore, you are focusing on quality assurance as an ongoing activity in your projects. It helps ensure appropriate standards and operational definitions are used, which means-
During a bidders conference, it is important that-
You are a project manager leading the construction project of a new garbage incinerator. Local residents and environmental groups are opposed to this project because of its environmental impact. Management agrees with your request to partner with a third party that will be responsible for providing state-of-the-art "air scrubbers," to clean the exhaust to an acceptable level. This decision will delay the project but will allow it to continue. It is an example of which of the following risk response?
After a year and a half, it is now time for you to close your program. First, you are working on closing procurements. The key benefit of the Close Procurement process is-
Working in the systems integration field, you are primarily responsible for coordinating the work of numerous subcontractors. Your current project is coming to an end. You have 15 major subcontractors as well as a variety of other sellers. Now that you are closing contracts (procurements), you should-
You are managing a moderately risky project. You have done well identifying risks and assessing them both on the probability of the risk event occurring and on the level of impact that the risk could have on your project if it actually occurred. But to help with a "next" level of qualitative risk analysis, you could use a-
You are identifying possible risks to your project concerning the development of a nutritional supplement. You want to reach out to your experts and build consensus on the risks that qualitative and quantitative risk analysis can address later. Although you can use various techniques, a key information gathering technique that helps to build consensus is-
Managing five contractors on your project for a new stadium in your City that can be used for baseball and for football and can be easily converted for either sport is a challenge along with managing your 15 person project team. You decided to conduct an audit of one of your contractors and are-
You are awarding another contract to serve as an integration contract on your stadium project. It has generated a lot of interest from potential sellers, and you now expect a number of proposals. You decide a weighting system can be used for all but which one of the following reasons?
One way to make it more likely to practice project risk management on projects is to-
Your firm specializes in roller-coaster construction. It recently received an RFP to build the world's most "death-defying" roller coaster. You know that such a roller coaster has never been built before and that this would be a high-risk project. If your firm wins, it will receive a cost-plus-award-fee contract, which means-
Work performance information in Control Risks means that-
A number of factors affect make-or-buy decisions such as-
For complex procurement items, often contract negotiation can be an independent process. An example of an input if such a process is used is-
Marketplace conditions are an input to which one of the following processes?
Each project can benefit from stakeholder involvement; however, it is in both the project manager's and the teams' best interest to ensure that all project stakeholdershave positive attitudes toward the project and its goals and objectives. Working as a project manager, you have a number of key stakeholders on your project. The stakeholder that identifies potential conflicts between organizational strategies and project goals is the-
Assume you are awarding a contract for your project for a new generation of nuclear missiles. The contract will have an extensive approval process because-
When determining the message that you will deliver to stakeholders, knowing both the content (what you want to say) and your audience is important. Which of the following helps you to understand how others may interpret your message?
One of the reasons why it is challenging to work on a virtual team is that e-mail is the primary form of communications. However, words alone typically comprise what percent of the total impact of any message?
Assume you are working for a major airline in your country. Rather than use paper tickets to board, it has authorized a new product so they are available on mobile phones or smart watches to show to the gate agent and speed up boarding times. This project then is authorized because of a-
Which of the following are the essential characteristics that make a group of activities a project?
Which of the following is a project?
Which of the following are the process groups?
Which of the following is not a project management knowledge area?
Which of the following is the best definition of progressive elaboration?
Your project depends on two business partners, On The Fly Inc. (OTF) and The Sure Thing Inc. (ST), delivering their products to you on time. The chances are three out of four that OTF will make the delivery on time and two out of three that ST will not make the delivery on time. The probability that OTF and ST will both deliver on time is equal to:
Both projects and operations share all the following characteristics except:
You are being interviewed by a functional manager, who says, "We have this huge undertaking of launching an online education website that contains different components, such as designing the website, developing the content, developing the administrative system including registration and payment, marketing the courses on the website, integrating different components of the website, and finally going live. Each component is functionally CAPM(R) in Depth 43 complex and large enough that it will be better served under a different management." The manager is most likely describing a:
Your company runs a website that makes digital music downloads available to end users. You have been assigned a project that involves adding parental guidance warnings to various downloads. This project originated due to which category of factors?
Select each of the following that is a project management knowledge area:
What is not true about project management processes?
As you have decided to outsource a piece of your project, you will conduct procurements using a process belonging to which process group?
In which of the following organizational structures does the project manager have the greatest authority?
In which of the following organizational structures does the project manager have the least authority?
Check each that is the correct representation of the PMI talent triangle:
Strategic and business management skills include all except:
The project resource availability is at maximum in organizations with the following structure(s):
The project manager is responsible for achieving project objectives in an organization with the following structure(s):
You have just joined an organization as a project manager and are studying the enterprise environmental factors of the organization to find out how you can leverage them for the success of your upcoming projects. Enterprise environmental factors may have what kind of influence on the projects?
Technical project management skills include the abilities to: (Check all that apply)
Select the internal enterprise environmental factors:
Which of the following are the project management business documents?
Which document is issued to authorize a project?
Who authorizes the project?
Which of the following issues the project charter document?
What document is the result of the integration management process in the project initiation process group?
The project charter is important for which of the following reasons?
Which of the following is not included in the project charter?
You have been named the project manager for a project in your company codenamed Kill the Bill. The project must complete before Thanksgiving Day this year. This represents which of the following project characteristics?
Which of the following is true about assumptions in project initiation?
What is not true about the Manage Project Knowledge process?
Every change request must be processed through which process?
The process or processes used to learn lessons from a project are:
Which of the following is not the output of directing and managing project work?
The integrated change control process is used to manage changes to the project at which stage?
A project manager is getting the risk-related recommended corrective actions approved. Which of the following processes is the project manager involved in?
You have just received approval from the change control board to implement a few change requests. What process are you going to execute for that to happen?
Walking down the hallway, you heard a program manager saying to a project manager, "You need the performance reports to run this process." Which process might the program manager be referring to?
You heard a functional manager saying, "We are going to skip the closing stage. There is no need for formalities in this project; it's a total waste of time." For which kind of projects is it appropriate to skip the closing stage?
Which of the following stakeholders can authorize the closure of a project?
You are preparing to close a project you have been managing. Which of the following is not an input to the Close Project or Phase process?
Which of the following is a false statement about the WBS?
Which of the following is done first?
The WBS is the output of which of the following processes?
The project scope statement is the output of which of the following processes?
Which of the following is a false statement about the output of the plan scope management process that creates the project scope management plan?
What are the components in the lowest level of the WBS hierarchy collectively called?
Choose what is included in the project scope statement:
Which one of the following constitutes the project scope baseline?
Who creates the WBS?
Which of the following is not included in the project scope statement?
You are in the process of developing the requirement management plan for your project. You will develop this plan:
You are in the planning stage of a project. Walking down the hallway, your supervisor mumbles, "Don't forget job shadowing." Job shadowing is a technique used in:
You are planning the scope for your project. You have just created the requirement documentation after meeting with the stakeholders and studying the project charter and so forth. This requirement documentation can be used in developing:
Which of the following is the correct order of running processes? Choose all that apply.
You have selected a node in the hierarchy of the WBS that you will use to compare schedule, cost, and scope with the earned value in order to measure the project performance. This node or component in the WBS is called:
You are the project manager for a software product, and your project is in the execution stage. You have learned that Maya, a developer, has started adding some new features to the deliverable she is working on. What is the best action for you to take?
Which of the following is the most commonly used network diagramming method?
What is the crashing technique used for?
Which of the following is a true statement about the critical path?
In your research project on tourism, you must collect data before the tourist season ends because the project involves interviewing tourists. The data-collection activity has which of the following kinds of dependency?
You know from a network diagram that Activity B cannot start until Activity A is finished. Which of the following are true?
Why should you monitor the activities on the critical path more closely?
You estimate the duration of an activity as five days because an expert told you that it took five days to complete a similar activity in a previous project. Which of the following methods might the expert be using for this activity duration estimate?
You have developed the schedule for your project, and you've called the kickoff meeting. A team member who is responsible for an activity comes to you and tells you that the activity cannot be performed within the allocated time because some pieces were left out during activity definition. The revised estimate will add two more days to the activity duration, but the activity is not on the critical path. Which of the following actions will you take?
The amount of time by which an activity can be delayed without changing the project finish date is called:
You are the project manager of a project that is running behind schedule. The project sponsor is very unhappy at the new finish date that you proposed, but he has accepted it. However, you also requested extra funds to support the extended time of work, and the sponsor has refused to supply more funds and is threatening to cancel the project if you cannot finish the project within the planned budget. What are your options?
Consider the following network diagram. Which of the following is the critical path? CAPM(R) in Depth 219
What is the float for Activity G in the network diagram in Question 11?
What is the length of the critical path in the network diagram shown in Question 11?
You use a three-point estimate for activity duration estimating. An activity has a duration of 9 days for an optimistic scenario, 18 days for a pessimistic scenario, and 12 days for the most-likely scenario. Which of the following will you take as the duration estimate if a weight of 4 is assigned to the most-likely scenario as compared to a weight of 1 for each of the optimistic and pessimistic scenarios?
Which of the following is not an input item to the Define Activities process?
Which of the following is not an output of the schedule control process?
The project charter is an input to which schedule management process?
Management has asked you to produce a chart that depicts the resource needs for all the activities in the project. Which of the following charts is management referring to?
Which of the following is not an output of the Plan Resource Management process?
Which of the following is a true statement about the team charter?
Which of the following is generally the best conflictresolution technique to resolve conflict in your team in most situations?
Karl, one of your team members, is arguing with you over how to perform a specific task. At the end of a long discussion, you say, "Karl, I know you feel different about it, but please do me a favor and do it this way for my peace of mind." Which conflict-resolution technique are you using?
Which of the following is not a situation well suited for team-development efforts?
You are in the beginning of executing your project, and you need to make assignments to individuals who will do the project work. Which process should you perform?
Virtual teams are a tool and technique used in which of the following processes?
You heard in the hallway that the project manager of The Da Vinci Code project, named Pappu Gloria, has very poor soft skills. If this is true, Pappu Gloria needs to improve his:
Which of the following is not the standard tool or technique you need to acquire a project team?
Pam Cruise, the engineering manager, receives daily progress reports from all the engineers she manages. She also visits the cubicles of the engineers several times a day to ensure that they are working and not just browsing the Web. Most of the engineers agree that she is a micromanager. What kind of management theory is she applying?
Gary Meltzer, the engineering manager, receives weekly progress reports from all the engineers he manages. He encourages them to take ownership of their assignments. Most of the engineers agree that he trusts his engineers. What kind of management theory is he applying?
Susan Travis, the project manager, receives weekly progress reports from all the engineers she manages. She rewards the achievements of her employees and always gives credit to her employees for their accomplishments. She is always willing to mentor her team members and to put them on a career path. She also helps the good performers to get the assignments and projects of their choice. What kind of management theory is she applying?
Your project sponsor has asked you to ensure that allotted resources are used, unused resources are immediately released, and no unplanned resource is allotted. To ensure that, which process would you run?
Your project is in the planning stage. You first want to make the cost estimates for the planned project activities, and then you want to aggregate those costs. Which process will you perform first? a. Determine Budget b. Plan Resource Management c. Estimate Costs d. Plan Cost Management 2. Which of the following processes will you perform first?
Your supervisor has asked you to put some contingency reserves into your project plans. Which of the following is not true about contingency reserves?
You are in the process of developing the cost baseline for your project. What is the name of this process?
Assume that you are the project manager for the construction of a 15-mile road. Further assume that the work is uniformly distributed over 12 weeks. The total approved budget for this project is $600,000. At the end of first three weeks of work, $160,000 has been spent, and five miles of road have been completed. What is the earned value of the project at the end of the first three weeks?
Assume that you are the project manager for the construction of a 15-mile road. Further assume that the work is uniformly distributed over 12 weeks. The total approved budget for this project is $600,000. At the end of first three weeks of work, $160,000 has been spent, and five miles of road have been completed. What is the planned value of the project at this point in time?
Assume that you are the project manager for the construction of a 15-mile road. Further assume that the work is uniformly distributed over 12 weeks. The total approved budget for this project is $600,000. At the end of first three weeks of work, $160,000 has been spent, and five miles of road have been completed. What is the cost variance?
Assume that you are the project manager for the construction of a 15-mile road. Further assume that the work is uniformly distributed over 12 weeks. The total approved budget for this project is $600,000. At the end of first three weeks of work, $160,000 has been spent, and five miles of road have been completed. What is the schedule variance?
A project has a CPI value of 1.25 and an SPI value of 1.33. It means which of the following?
Project cost performance is measured by comparing the project results from work performance data against the integrated performance measurement baseline. Which of the following are the three elements of this integrated performance measurement baseline?
An influential stakeholder has submitted a request for completing the project earlier than planned in less time. What are the two parameters that are most likely to be affected by this time change?
You are managing a project in biotechnology code named Mitochondria Eve. You need work performance measurements or information to write the performance reports. Which process(es) will you run?
The cost of a project activity is estimated to be $500 with 10% accuracy. What is the estimated range of cost?
Which of the following is not listed as an input item in PMBOK to develop the cost management plan?
The data presentation model that presents a stakeholder's influence, impact, and interest in one plot is called a:
You are project manager of project named "Teach the Congress." Your friend Cosmo is a project manager of a project that shares some resources with your project. What kind of influence does Cosmo have on your project?
You have just joined a project that has already been planned. You want to take a look at strategies to implement and actions to perform to facilitate creative stakeholders' involvement in the project, such as making project decisions and doing project execution. Where you will look?
Which of the following is not generated during the Plan Stakeholder Engagement process?
The focus of the stakeholder management knowledge area is:
Project business documents are input to which stakeholder process?
Which of the following is an input to all the processes of stakeholder management?
Which of the following is not an output of monitoring stakeholder engagement?
You have generated a project document named project communications that can be used in which of the following processes?
The salience model can be used in which of the following processes?
Which of the following communication skills are necessary for a project manager? a)Listening, b) negotiating, c) resolving conflict, d) pursuing a team, e) setting expectations Select the most correct answer:
You want to ensure that messages are delivered and understood. Which communication model would you implement for that to happen?
You are trying to understand the message sent to you by one of your team members, who lives on the other side of the globe.The team member has used lots of local phrases and acronyms that you are trying to understand. According to the basic communication model, what are you dealing with here?
Which of the following is not an output of communication planning?
Which of the following is not an output of the Manage Communication process?
The issues log is not an input used in the following process:
What of the following is not a part of communications?
Which of the following is not an input to the Manage Communication process?
Which one of the following items will be certainly updated as a result of the Manage Communication process?
You have created the work performance report about the project that you are managing.Which process will you use to distribute the report among the stakeholders?
The sponsor of your project wants to look at the raw data from executing the project--that is, the work performance data. Which process should you run to get this information?
The sponsor of your project wants to look at the work performance information. Which process should you run to get this information?
The Monitor Communication process is performed according to the following plan or plans: (choose the best answer)
What is the name of a quality-planning technique that involves comparing the results of similar activities?
What of the following about matrix diagrams is not true?
What of the following about quality metrics is not true?
Which of the following is not an input to the Manage Quality process?
You are the project manager for the Mind The Gap project. You are going to meet with your project team, where you are going develop quality tests that incorporate the organization's quality policies and procedures. Which of the following processes are you performing?
Quality audits are part of which of the following quality management processes?
You are the project manager of the Green Schools project. Your supervisor has asked you to make some self-checks and inspections before the stakeholders ask for a formal inspection. It is time to perform which process?
You are using an Ishikawa diagram to find real causes of a problem by exploring all the possible causes. Which one of the quality processes are you performing?
You want to examine the results of a process to determine whether the process is in or out of control. Which of the following is the most suitable tool to use?
You are managing a software project with limited development resources. The QA department has discovered a large number of defects in the product, and the project sponsor is very concerned about this. You want to get the maximum number of defects repaired with minimal effort and cost. Which quality-control tool are you going to use before you direct the efforts of the project team to fix specific problems?
You are the project manager for a software development project that has limited resources. The customer is concerned about the quality of the code developed and wants you to conduct the code review. The product contains a large body of code with millions of lines.Which approach will you take?
Which of the following is not an input to controlling quality?
Which of the following tools or techniques is not listed in PMBOK to be used in the perform quality control process?
What about flowcharts is not true?
What about mind mapping is not true?
The plan-do-check-act cycle of quality management was:
Which of the following is a false statement about project risks?
The risk register is not an input to which of the following processes?
Which of the following is not an information-gathering technique listed in PMBOK Edition 6 for use in the risk identification process?
Which of the following statements about risk analysis is false?
You are managing a project to set up data servers to support a website for an enterprise customer. The location of the servers has been chosen to be close to the customer due to their requirements. However, this location is prone to natural disasters, such as hurricanes and flooding. You have decided to install some extra servers in another city that will act as backup if a disaster happens. This is an example of which of the following?
The risk management team of a software project has decided that due to the lack of adequate talent in your company, development of a specific part of the system is under high risk, so they have decided to outsource it.This is an example of which of the following?
You are in the process of evaluating the probability and impact of a risk by assigning numbers, such as expected monetary value. This is an example of which of the following?
Consider Figure 11-4. Assume that the risk has a 50 percent probability of occurrence. If the risk does occur, it could have a positive or a negative impact equivalent to $200,000 or $50,000, respectively, with the probabilities shown in the figure. 466 Chapter 11 | Project Risk Management Figure 11-4. Example of positive and negative risk impact What is the EMV for the positive impact?
Consider Figure 11-4. Assume that the risk has a 50 percent probability of occurrence. If the risk does occur, it could have a positive or a negative impact equivalent to $200,000 or $50,000, respectively, with the probabilities shown in the figure. What is the EMV for the risk?
Which of the following is a correct statement about secondary risks?
Which of the following is not a valid risk response?
Which of the following is a valid statement about SWOT?
Which of the following is not an output of qualitative risk analysis?
Which of the following is not an output of quantitative risk analysis?
A project manager is recommending corrective actions related to risk. In which of the following processes is the project manager involved?
A project manager is getting the risk-related recommended corrective actions approved. In which of the following processes is the project manager involved?
In project risk management, which of the following statements is not true?
Which of the following is not an input to the Monitor Risks process?
You are a project manager at a company that is a seller for another company. You are coordinating the efforts to bid on a contract with another company to sell the product of your company. Which of the following contract types carries the most risk for your company?
Ron Collins is the project manager for a biotechnology company. He is outsourcing a part of the project to a foreign company. The foreign company will charge Ron $10 per hour for each employee that will be involved in the outsourced part of the project. Ron will also be charged an extra amount of $100 per month for other charges, such as using the facilities for the duration of the project. What type of contract is it?
Which of the following is not true about planning procurements?
In procurement, which of the following contract types presents the highest risk for the buyer?
You are managing a software project. The project is already in the execution stage when you discover that a whole software module is missing from the work breakdown structure (WBS). Your company does not have the programmers to write the module in a timely fashion, so you decide to procure this piece of work. The module will have a number of small programs working together, and it will take almost the same effort to write any of these programs. The software experts have given you an estimate of how much that effort will be. However, it is not clear at this stage how many programs will be needed. Which type of contract will you choose in this situation?
The analysis to make a buy-or-make decision is performed during which of the following procurement process?
Your company is outsourcing a part of your project and therefore is preparing the procurement documents. Which of the following is not a bidding document?
Your organization is playing the seller role in doing a part of a project for another company, the buyer. The buyer has incomplete specifications for the work involved at this stage and wants you to start the work after signing the agreement.Which of the following contract types will be the most beneficial for your organization?
Which of the following is the correct order in which to perform the listed processes for the first time?
Which of the following is not an activity of the Control Procurements process?
You are in the process of closing the Stem Cells Are Us project. Which of the following is not an output of the Close Project or Phase process?
Which of the following is the correct order of performing processes?
The seller proposals, an input item for Conduct Procurements, is created during which process?
Daniel is managing the development of an ecommerce website for his organization. Daniel enjoys coercive powers and has assigned Julie, a project team member, to facilitate the team meetings. During any team meeting, Julie must?
You are a consulting project manager and have been contracted by an investment bank to run a large information technology project that is expected to last 15 months. During the Direct and Manage Project Work process, you discover that several regulatory requirements have not been addressed in the project management plan. Failure to meet these requirements could result in legal action against the company. However, implementing the technology to comply with these regulations exceeds the budget and scope of the project, and could result in the cancellation of the project. What should you do?
A fundamentally functional organization creates a special project team to handle a critical project. This team has many of the characteristics of a project team in a project organization and has a Project manager dedicated to the project. Such an organization would be called:
As you are creating the Activity List, which technique is recommended for subdividing the project into smaller components called activities?
Linda has been assigned to establish a PMO in her organization. Linda believes that this project cannot be successful unless all of the key project stakeholders support the project. She also believes that she needs to pay special attention on stakeholder management to ensure success of this project. As the first step, she needs to develop her stakeholder register. Which of the following processes must be started by Linda to produce the project stakeholder register?
What is the primary risk with including reserves or contingency allowances in your cost estimate?
Which of the following is not an organizational process asset that is used during the Plan Human Resource Management process?
With the establishment of a PMO in an organization, the project management jargon is being adopted by the employees. However, few people are still struggling with the project management terminologies. One of the most common confusion is the difference between a project stakeholder and a key stakeholder. Who are the key stakeholders?
Perform Integrated Change Control includes several configuration management activities. Which of the following is not part of Perform Integrated Change Control?
If you are influencing factors that create changes to the cost of the project, which process are you using?
14.) If you are requesting a vendor quote for a defined scope, what is the recommended contract type?
15.) All of the following are interpersonal skills EXCEPT:
16.) What is the logical sequence of the Project Scope Management processes?
The most detailed level of the WBS is called the _______________ .
Which of the following is a tool or technique used in the Monitor and Control Project Work process?
A large network hardware upgrade project was scheduled to take place over a weekend. During the course of the implementation, several previously unidentified dependencies for additional materials were discovered. The project manager gave approval for the tech staff doing the implementation procure with corporate credit cards several hundred dollars worth of additional equipment required to complete the implementation. However these additional expenses caused the project to exceed its budget. How should the project manager handle this?
During the Plan Procurement Management phase, the make-or____analysis must be completed. This technique prompts the project team to determine the source of their item.
Which of these precedence relationships is least commonly used in Precedence Diagramming Method?
Your company has temporarily assigned you to serve as a project manager at a company location outside your home country. While meeting with a vendor your first day on the job, you are presented with a gift. The corporate policy at the headquarters in your home country prohibits employees from accepting these types of gifts. However, as you are new to this location, you believebut are not sure-that the local policy, as well as local custom may differ. How should you respond?
If you want a group of experts to identify project risks, but also want unbiased data, what is an appropriate technique to use?
If you are working on a project with constantly changing scope, which contract type would work best when hiring an outside vendor to complete a portion of the work?
Which process of integrative project management documents the actions necessary to define, prepare, integrate, and coordinate all subsidiary plans into a project management plan?
Mary is currently focusing on controlling the key stakeholder engagement on her project. The project management plan is an essential input to this process. Which of the following components of the project management plan is least likely to be utilized during this process?
If you are measuring the quality of items in a sample on a pass/fail basis, what is that called?
The Requirements Traceability Matrix helps in tracing all of the following except:
Which of the following should you NOT use as an input into creating the WBS structure?
You are on the vendor selection committee for a large IT project that you will be managing for your company. Your friend works for a company that is planning to bid on the project. During a social dinner, the friend tells his job is on the line if his company does not win the contract. What should you do?
Which of these processes is NOT a project time management process?
The technique most commonly used by project management software packages to construct a project schedule network diagram is:
If you are creating a new WBS for your project, what should you consider to save time during the creation process?
Which of these precedence relationships is most commonly used in Precedence Diagramming Method?
You are the project manager in your organization. You have very little authority over the projects you manage, and you are mainly engaged in project coordination activities. You are currently struggling with obtaining the required human resources for your project during the Acquire Project Team process. Who you need to negotiate with to obtain these resources?
A good quality audit should be:
The Project Charter formally authorizes a project. Who authorizes the project charter?
In an ongoing project, the project sponsor and a manager of the performing organization are having conflicts. What would be your comment on this situation?
When would Rolling Wave Planning be useful in a project?
1.) You are managing a multi-million dollar project, and discover several critical pieces of data in the project information repository have been modified without authorization. What should you do?
If you are developing a Project Management Plan, how should you determine the level of detail to be included in the plan?
If you want to have multiple vendors bid on your contract, what is the best way to ensure that all vendors have the same information before bidding?
Randy is managing a project and identifies that there are 8 stakeholders in the project. He is worried that he might end up with an unmanageable number of communication channels. In your view, how many communication channels does Randy have to plan for?
Julie is currently populating her project's stakeholder register with the names and details of the people identified during the Identify Stakeholders process. Some of these people are not supporting the project but they can directly influence the project. Julie is adding these people to her project's stakeholder register because?
You have been asked to establish a project charter for your new project. According to PMBOK, who normally has the responsibility to authorize the charter?
As a project manager, you are performing various project performance measurements to assess the magnitude of variation. You then attempt to determine the cause and decide whether corrective action is required. This would be known as:
Sarah has just started the Identify Stakeholders process for her project. She is currently looking for a template for the stakeholder register so that she doesn't have to reinvent the wheel. Where can she find stakeholder register templates?
A project manager wishes to expand an existing list of sellers. Which of the following techniques should she consider?
Which of these tools is NOT a part of the Seven Basic Tools of Quality?
Which quality control technique or tool should be used when trying to determine the cause of a major defect?
During a project update meeting for the key stakeholders, the schedule of some project activities was challenged. The VP Operations challenged that some of the critical path activities cannot be executed as scheduled as they will disturb critical operations. The VP has requested rescheduling of these tasks so that they are carried out during the non-working times of the business. What should the project manager do first?
Why is it important to have a staff release plan for people within the project team?
Midway through a project, a project manager determined that the project was running way behind schedule. If the project manager needs to shorten the project schedule, without changing the project scope, which of the following schedule compression techniques could be applied?
Quantitative risk analysis should be performed:
While a co-worker is out on vacation for two weeks, you are standing in for her as the project manager of a process improvement project. During project meetings it becomes apparent that there is a great deal of conflict between stakeholders, and as you review the project documentation you discover that the vacationing project manager has made several critical project decisions without collecting inputs from the stakeholders. Some of these decisions resulted in changes to the project scope, and did not go through the formal change management process. What should you do?
While analyzing a project, the project manager calculated the ratio of the Earned Value (EV) to the Actual Costs (AC) and obtained a value of 1.2. The project manager decided that this was an unfavorable condition to the project and decided to take corrective action. What is your view?
Which of these is not an approved Estimate Activity Durations technique?
If you are working on a project where there is no definite project detailed scope, but similar projects have been completed in the past, what is the correct Estimate Activity Durations tool to use?
As project manager, you would like to show the relationship between two variables to help your project team understand the quality impacts better. Which tool should be used?
You have been called in to give an executive presentation on the status of your project. Just before you walk into the meeting, you are informed that a critical resource for the project is no longer available, and could result in a substantial delay to the project. However, you believe there may be an alternative resource that could be used. What do you tell the executive committee?
In a cause and effect diagram, which of these is not a potential cause?
Which of the following is inaccurately represented by the term Progressive elaboration?
Susan is about to review her project stakeholder management plan to make some necessary adjustments. She has got her project management plan, the recent issue log and the work performance data. Which of the following inputs is still missing for this process?
If you want to reduce the number of quality inspections and thus reduce the cost of quality control for your project, which technique should be used?
When beginning a new outsourcing project, what is the best way to determine which companies you should request a bid from?
Which of the following is not a general management technique used to generate different approaches to execute and perform the project work?
Your boss advises you that your final project schedule and budget must be ready to present to the executive steering committee at a meeting later this week. A draft schedule has been completed based on estimates provided by your team. However, they have not yet had a chance to review the schedule to be sure their estimates are appropriate and realistic. Timing constraints make it impossible to complete this review before the meeting. What is the best approach?
The date through which the project has provided actual status and accomplishments is called:
Which of these is NOT a risk diagramming technique?
Which of the following is a tool or technique for the Develop Project Team process?
A hierarchical structure of resources organized by resource type category and resource type used in resource leveling schedules is known as:
A Project Manager's primary professional responsibility is towards:
A project team member finds that the color scheme of the webpage he is designing appears too gaudy and decides to change it to a mellowed down color scheme. The independent testing team flags this as a defect and there is a heated discussion between the team member and the testing team. What is your view?
As an external vendor, you are managing a complex software project that has been contracted on Time & Material (T&M). One of your teammembers reports a break-through in automating some of the testing activities. This will potentially result in cost savings to the project as well as the project getting completed ahead of schedule by a month. Which of the following actions would you take?
What is the advantage of preparing an estimate of costs by an outside professional estimator?
Which of the following may help in ensuring that certain bidders in the procurement process do not receive preferential treatment that all prospective sellers have a clear and common understanding of the procurement?
If you have an unresolved issue while working on a project, what is the best way to communicate that issue?
Your manager has asked you to include the Human Resource Management Plan and the Schedule Management Plan in your Project Management Plan. Is this the appropriate place for these items?
On obtaining the project charter, the Project Manager of a project immediately starts acquiring the project team. Is this correct?
Your project schedule shows a 15 month finish, but your customer has just realized there is a regulatory requirement to complete the project by a certain date and insists this project must be finished in 12 months. Which of the following is the best approach?
What is the difference between a histogram and a Pareto chart?
Michael is managing a construction project. The project charter has been approved by the project sponsor. What should Michael do next?
When a negative unidentified risk occurs in a project, a response to it would be called:
Martin is the project manager of a project that is in an early phase. He needs to estimate costs but finds that he has a limited amount of detailed information about the project. Which of the following estimation techniques would be least suited to his requirements?
If you had an experience with a particularly good or poor performing vendor, what is the correct way to document this experience for future projects?
John is managing a software development project for the first time. He is facing issues with scheduling meetings with the senior project managers at the company as they are extremely busy with their current assignments. John needs to understand what went right and wrong on previous similar projects so that he can manage his project better. In this situation, what should John do?
Which of these is not a tool or technique for the Control Procurements process?
You are looking at various process improvement models. Which of the following is not a process improvement model?
Which of these statement correctly links project and product life cycles?
Before closing a contract, the project manager should:
Carole is the project manager for a healthcare facility construction project. She is currently holding a board briefing and updating the project's current status to the board members. When Carole was presenting her project risks, the chairman suggested some preventive actions. What should Carole do first?
A management control point where scope, budget, actual cost and schedule are integrated and compared to earned value for performance measurement is called a:
You are defining the schedule activities for your project and identifying deliverables at the lowest level in the Work Breakdown Structure (WBS). You find that there is insufficient definition of the project scope to decompose a branch of the WBS down to the work package level. You now look at using the last component in that branch of the WBS to develop a high-level project schedule for that component. Such a planning component is called:
As a project manager of a project, you are analyzing the costs which have incurred. Which of the following costs cannot be classified under 'Cost of non-conformance'
You are a consulting project manager with over 15 years experience running software development projects. You have been engaged to manage a finance application project for a new customer. However on the first day onsite at the customer's headquarters you are told the project has been cancelled, but there is a need for a project manager to manage a major infrastructure project to deploy a large number of servers and storage devices. The customer asks if you would be interested in leading this project. You have never managed this type of project before but would be interested in the challenge. Which of the follow is the best response?
A Project manager estimates the work to be accomplished in the near term in detail, at a low level of the Work Breakdown structure (WBS); while he estimates work far in the future as WBS components, that are at a relatively high level of the WBS. What is this technique called?
The WBS represents all product and project work. The total work at the lowest levels should roll up to the higher levels so that nothing is left out and no extra work is performed. This is also called as:
A technical team can begin editing of a large document 15 days after they begin writing it. What kind of a dependency would this be represented as?
You are at work related social event and a colleague tells you another project manager has just hired her niece's engineering firm for a city public improvement project that you are managing. You know that this company's proposal did not meet the pre-defined selection criteria to be considered for award. What do you do?
A project manager is just finishing a project that has not gone well. Apart from cost overruns and schedule overruns, there have been a lot of quality defects and the project required a lot of senior management intervention to finally reach completion. The project manager should now:
In a matrix organization, where the team members report to both, a functional manager as well as a project manager, generally, whose responsibility is it to manage the dual reporting relationship?
A first-time project manager wants to know during what phases of the project, Perform Integrated Change Control will be performed. What would you respond?
A Resource Breakdown Structure (RBS) would be used to breakdown the project by type of resources. The RBS is an example of a:
A pharmaceutical company has recently established a PMO in the company to centrally manage the corporate projects. This has resulted in the spread of the project management jargon in the company. Some of the employees are now being called 'project managers' by the PMO. Most of the project managers are getting confused with this new project management jargon. One of the questions being repeatedly asked is the difference between the work performance data and the work performance information. Which of the following correctly differentiates these two?
While managing a project, you decide to prepare an email for the project stakeholders describing the current project status. This is best described as an example of:
Analogous Estimating is an estimation technique that use the values of parameters such as scope, cost, budget and duration from a previous similar activity as the basis of activity and is frequently used to estimate when there is a limited amount of information about the project. This is a form of:
During the execution of your project, you decide that you would like to have charts of your project status cost and schedule, display certain key project data, and hold your project meetings in a specific conference room. Such a place would be called:
The document that formally authorizes a project is the:
You are managing a medium sized construction project, and are reviewing some invoices from the electrical contractor. You see that materials not required for your project have been included on the invoice. After making a few phone calls it becomes clear that one of your project resources asked one of the vendor's staff to add a few extra circuits to one part of the building. This change was never approved through the change management process. What do you do?
You are presented with a situation in a project where you need to measure the performance of the project. Which of these techniques would suit your requirement?
A manager asks you to evaluate four new projects that he has suggested for next year. You review the projects and notice that one is not really a project, but more an operational task. Which of these is not a project?
Which of the following Project Scope Management processes documents a configuration management system?
The stakeholders of a project typically have:
A project was estimated to cost $ 200,000 with a timeline of 10 months. Due to a shipment delay, the schedule was slightly delayed. This was however made up by receiving the first batch of materials for the project by air. The net result was that there was some additional cost in the project. At the end of the second month, the Project Manager reviews the project and finds that the project is 20% complete and Actual Costs are $ 50,000. The Estimate to complete (ETC) for the project would now be:
You have a team of engineers working on your project. Two of the engineers have frequent disagreements. You ask them to resolve their differences through a discussion. However, that does not yield any results. Subsequently, you get involved and based on an analysis of the situation, suggest some changes in the way they work with each other. This still does not yield results and you find that the project schedule is beginning to suffer. What is you next course of action?
As a project manager, where would you document the escalation process to resolve issues that cannot be resolved at a lower staff level?
You are planning out the communications methods to use as part of stakeholder management. The most effective means for communicating and resolving issues with stakeholders is:
A project manager wishes to illustrate the connections between the work that needs to be done and the project team members. According to the PMBOK, the resulting document would be called:
Many project managers have seen a graph which shows "Influence of Stakeholders" starting out high and declining as the project progresses. Conversely, it shows the "Cost of Changes" starting out low and increasing as the project progresses. What is the key message a project manager should obtain from this graph?
Which of the following contains an extensive procurement changes approval process?
A project manager found that some of the project work was not done at the right time and was done in an improper sequence. What do you think was the likely issue?
A contract change control system should include:
Which of the following is not a Group Creativity Technique used in the Collect Requirements process?
Linda is a project manager in charge of an online banking project. The project has completed phase 1 and is moving into the next phase of the project. Which of the following processes must be carried out first for the phase 2?
The WBS is finalized by establishing control accounts for the work packages and a unique identifier from a code of accounts. This provides a structure for hierarchical summation of:
While managing a project, you have included the product acceptance criteria in the Quality Management Plan. When reviewing your plan, a senior manager asks you look at this closely. You then realize that what you have done is incorrect. Where should you actually place the product acceptance criteria?
The Project Scope Management is primarily concerned with:
Why must the Validate Scope be completed in a project?
A project manager wants to use a group decision making technique to generate, classify and prioritize requirements. Which of these is not a valid group decision making technique?
Your project is slightly behind schedule, and you have not yet made a full impact assessment to make associated project changes to accommodate it. The weekly project status meeting is this afternoon, and because of your conference call schedule this morning you will not be able to complete the assessment to report to in the meeting. However, this is only a minor delay and you do not want anyone to worry unnecessarily. What is the best response?
You are involved as project manager in a fairly large-sized project. You are in the process of making a procurement decision and plan to go with a simple purchase order. However, you are doubtful whether this is the correct thing to do and decide to find out more details about the process to be followed. Based on your findings, which of the following would be correct?
Which of the following is an output of the Define Activity process?
A control chart is used to determine whether or not a process is stable or has predictable performance. When a process is within acceptable limits, the process need not be adjusted. What are the upper and lower control limits usually set as?
Robert is currently identifying his project stakeholders. Which of the following is the key input to this process?
As part of a new project that you have just started on as project manager, you are putting together your team and find that one of the critical pieces of work requires a specialist from one of the functional departments. However, you are aware that the functional manager may not be very happy giving the resource to your project since your project is not a very high-profile one. Which of the following techniques will you need to apply:
The three categories into which contracts can be broadly classified are:
The Plan-Do-Check-Act (PDCA) cycle as the basis for Quality Improvement is generally attributed to:
For any complex project, once the project stakeholders are identified, the next step is to classify these stakeholders based on their current and desired engagement levels. What is the benefit of classifying the project stakeholders?
In a Finish to Start relationship between predecessor and successor activities, a project manager decides to schedule a successor activity 5 days before its predecessor is complete. This is accomplished by providing 5 days of:
While managing a project, you decide to contract to an external enterprise. You enter into a contract where you pay the external enterprise a set amount (as defined by the contract), irrespective of the seller's costs. What would best describe this type of contract?
Susan is the project manager for a dam construction project. All project communications are recorded and documented for future reference. It has been decided that the project team will maintain last three months of project communication records at any given point in time. It has also been decided that the older communication records will be archived on a monthly basis. Where these records must be archived?
The Develop Project Management Plan process does not include?
Which of these is not an information gathering technique used in the Identify Risks process?
Which of the following is accurate regarding Project Integration Management?
Which of the following is NOT a tool or technique of the Acquire Project Team process?
A company you worked for several years ago is bidding on a project your new company will be starting in approximately 6 months. You have been selected to manage the project, and will be participating in the vendor selection processes. What should you do?
While the five process groups are typically completed in order, they often overlap with each other throughout the project. Which two process groups do not overlap unless a project is canceled?
What are the outputs of the Plan Procurement Management process?
You have met with your project sponsor and have been told that the project MUST be completed by the end of the year, no exceptions. This should be included in the project scope statement as a:
Your company has just announced a 10% cut in all project budgets company wide. Which of the following is the best response?
The change requests created as an output of the Monitor and Control Project Work process may be attributed to all of the following except:
Lee is the project manager of a project and is planning responses to a set of risks. As a direct response of implementing this risk response, he anticipates certain other risks to arise. These would be termed as:
You have been identified as the project manager for constructing a large shopping mall in your city. Which of the following are not necessarily stakeholders in your project?
A tool that provides a visual representation of human resource allocation to a project, number of working hours and availability on the project is a:
A project team is currently inspecting the recent project deliverables. The team is recording the number and the nature of defects found in these deliverables. The defect details list in this case is an example of?
Which of the Project Time Management processes involves identifying and documenting dependencies between schedule activities?
Your project sponsor has asked you to add 30% contingency to your project budget as a hedge against any unforeseen costs that could exceed the currently forecasted expenses, but has not provided any additional detail about why this is required. What do you do?
Steve is the project manager of a global project. He finds that of late, there has been a deterioration in the quality of communication between various team members across the globe. What would you term this?
You have recently started working at a company as a senior project manager. The company has no employee training programs in place for junior project managers. Some junior project managers have been asking you for assistance in dealing with some work related issues. You feel that they could benefit from some guidance. Which courses of action would NOT fulfill your responsibility?
Which of the following statements best describes Time & Material (T&M) contracts?
Cause and Effect diagrams are used to illustrate how various factors might be linked to potential problems or effects. They are also called:
When does the Close Project or Phase process need to be performed in case of multi-phased projects?
A project manager is about to start on a new project. Where would he find details about his authority level in the project?
In a project, Activity A has a duration of 4 days and begins on the morning of Monday the 4th. The successor Activity, B, has a Finish-to-Start (FS) relationship with
What is the BEST way to make an accurate forecasting of ETC?
Which of the following is not a valid instance of Risk Transference?
Under which of the following scenarios would you not use a Decision tree?
You have been assigned as a project manager of a new project to be executed out of New York. However, you determine that the project requires a Global Positioning Systems Expert who is not available within the company in New York. On doing a little checking, you determine that the company has an expert based in London, who is suitable for the project. However, the London based employee is not willing to relocate to New York for the project. In such a case:
As a project manager, you are in the process of preparing the project schedule for the project. Which of the following accurately depicts the sequence of your activities before you begin preparing the project schedule?
After one year of construction, an office building is scheduled to be completed on 30th January. The landscaping work needs to start 15 days prior to completion of the building. Which of the following relationships most likely represents the relationship of the start of landscaping work to the completion of the office building?
You are the project manager of a project. As part of the planning process, you utilize a planning technique to subdivide the project scope and deliverables into smaller, more manageable components. What is this technique called?
You have decided to apply Resource Leveling to a project due to a critical required resource being available only at certain times. Which of the following will likely be true?
Bar charts, with bars representing activities, show activity start dates as well as end dates and expected activity durations. For control and management communication, the broader, more comprehensive summary activity that is used between milestones is referred to as:
A technique that iterates the project schedule many times, to calculate a distribution of possible project completion dates is called:
The critical path method (CPM) calculates the theoretical early start and finish dates; and late start and finish dates. The difference between the late and early start of a task is called:
You are managing a project that involves work on a film shoot. The editing activity can happen only after the film has been shot. The logical relationship between the editing and shooting of the film can best be described as:
You are managing a project to manufacture widgets for a customer. The customer has come to the factory to examine the product, and determines that while the product itself meets its requirements, the manner in which about half the widgets have been packaged does not meet requirements and is insisting they be repackaged. This re-work will require considerable time, resources, and cost to complete. The investigation into how and why the packaging was problematic, revealed that no process was developed to govern how the widget was to be placed in the packaging. The result is that the assembly line workers developed their own processes for packaging. What do you do?
When writing the roles and responsibilities for team members, you should document the role, authority, responsibility and competency for each team member. Where must this information be documented?
A project's financial management reserve is identified in which process:
John has been assigned to design a new car model for a well-known car manufacturer. The project has a small number of key stakeholders and John is planning to meet all of them in person in order to understand their requirements and expectations. Which of the following is not a project key stakeholder?
Project stakeholders are individuals and organizations that are actively involved in the project or have an interest in it. Which of the following is not a stakeholder?
You have landed your dream job, as project manager working in an exotic sports car factory. Your project involves coming up with a smoother ride for the car. You have tasked the engineers to determine which type of suspension and what type of tires will provide the best ride and the most reasonable cost. This relates to which of the following processes?
The Manage Communications process requires which of the following inputs to determine which project management information system is available to manage project communications?
You are about to contract out a project to a service provider. However, at the time of awarding the contract, you are not sure of the total effort involved. Since the scope of work cannot be accurately estimated, you want to agree the per unit rates for difference services. Which of the following would best suit your purpose?
The Identify Stakeholders process has four inputs. Three of them are project charter, enterprise environmental factors and organizational process assets. What is the fourth one?
As an experienced PMP, you have found that running a WBS meeting is tricky because you need to find a balance between decomposition and excessive decomposition. When items are excessively decomposed it leads all of the following, EXCEPT:
You are the sponsor of a project that is designed to record phone calls for quality control purposes. You are in the process of writing the charter, what is NOT an input into this document?
John, a project manager, for Code Crashers Inc. has been assigned a project where he must lead a group of inexperienced programmers in developing a software package that creates Material Safety Data Sheets (MSDS) for a chemical company. This is very similar to a project that his colleague, Peter, worked on in 2006, with some junior programmers. If John needs to come up with a rough order of magnitude estimate, what tool or technique should he use?
You are an expatriate working in a foreign country and have been asked to offer a cash payment gift to the procurement manager at a company you are bidding on work for. How BEST should you interpret this request?
Jonathan is managing a computer network deployment project at a university campus. Jonathan wants to involve the key project stakeholders in the scheduling of the major work packages. He sends out a meeting invitation to all key stakeholders for this brainstorming session. Which of the following types of communication methods has Jonathan selected for the brainstorming?
The Project Managers have maximum authority in which type of organization?
As the Project Manager on the construction of a new hotel you have developed a project management plan that you believe is realistic and will be formally approved. The organizational assets that influenced the development of the plan may include all of the following except:
As part of your staffing management plan, you have developed a chart indicating the # of hours (Y axis) a senior programmer will be working over the months (X axis) of the project. This is an example of what?
Which of the following is a control tool that helps the project management team quantify and categorize defects according to sources?
While performing an audit on a project run by another project manager, a certified PMP, you find that project processes have not been followed, and that company procurement policies have been repeatedly violated. What do you do?
You have successfully passed your PMP exam and are leading a project to replace the storage devices in a data center. In the following week, you and your team of experts will be meeting with a storage device vendor to discuss the status of their deliverables that are due at week's end. What management process do these activities reflect?
Alan is the project manager of a project with 6 stakeholders. If the number of stakeholders goes up to 8, how many additional channels does he have to manage?
The project management plan can best be described as:
Which of the following is not an example of a procurement document?
Your company will receive a large bonus payment for completing a customer's project by a certain date. However, as the project manager, you know the project will complete approximately 2 weeks after that date as it is currently scheduled. Your manager is insisting that you to do whatever it takes to finish the project by that date, even if it means "cutting corners here and there." What do you do?
Your Vice President has asked you what the Estimate at Completion is going to be for a small project you are working on. You were given a budget of $30,000, and to date you have spent $20,000 but only completed $10,000 worth of work. You are sure that the future work will be accomplished at the planned rate.
You have just sat through an exhausting change control meeting discussing a change in scope to the project you have been working on for the last 7 months. After lengthy discussion the change in scope was approved. As the Project Manager you should now update all of the following documentation, EXCEPT:
You work at a software company that authors Material Safety Data Sheets (MSDS) for chemical companies. Prior to releasing the MSDS to the company you have created a list of items to be reviewed to see that they appear on the document such as: chemical name, CAS#, protection required, what to do an emergency, etc. This is an example of what type of tool?
A project team is required to prepare a monthly project update report for the project key stakeholders. This report must contain the current status of the deliverables, information related to the recently approved change requests, project's health and the forecasted estimates. This report is an example of?
You are the Project Manager for a large petroleum company and are in the process of writing the project charter for your sponsor. You have used the following as inputs except:
Which of these statements is accurate regarding quality management?
The Risk Register contains details of all identified risks and current status. It is a document containing the results of:
A co-worker mentions that another project manager regularly takes certain project resources to expensive dinners and expenses it to the company. However, this project manager does not recognize or reward the contributions of any other project resources. What should you do?
You the project manager responsible for building a 100,000 sq. ft. data center. One of the schedule activities in your plan is to install the Computer Room Air Conditioning (CRAC) units, however in order to start the installation of the units the raised floor in the data center must be completely installed first, so the units have something to be bolted on to. This is an example of what type of dependency?
Robert wants to assign a risk owner for every project risk for which a risk response action has been planned. Where must he update this information?
You are analyzing the risk in a project and decide to do sensitivity analysis to determine which risks have the most potential impact on the project. You look at a tool to help compare the relative importance of variables that have a high degree of uncertainty to those that are more stable. One such tool is:
A new CEO has come into your company and has promptly shut down your project because it no longer met the business needs of the company. While not pleased with the decision, you document the level and completeness of the project to date. What activity or process is this part of?
When a project is performed under contract, the contractual provisions will generally be considered as _____________ for the project.
You are the project manager responsible for building a 100,000 sq. ft. data center. One of the schedule activities in your plan is to install the Computer Room Air Conditioning (CRAC) units, however in order to start the installation of the units the raised floor in the data center must be completely installed first. This is an example of what type of precedence relationship?
The Manage Project Team process is part of what process group?
You have been assigned a project where you are responsible for building a condo complex in a resort town. The project is expected to take 2 years to complete. During your work breakdown structure meeting you have decomposed many deliverables into work packages and schedule activities, however there are some work packages that will be occurring a year from now, so you have elected not to decompose those deliverables and work packages at this time. This is an example of what tool and/or technique?
A Probability and Impact Matrix contains risks prioritized according to their potential implications for meeting the project's objectives. The typical approach is:
You are attempting to estimate the resources required to put the server racks together in the new data center you are building. It has occurred to you that you may be able to compress the schedule if you look at using power tools vs. hand tools to build the racks and use individuals who have worked on this brand of rack in the past. This is an example of what type of resource estimating tool?
A project is contracted as a Time & Material (T&M) type of contract. The service provider initially estimates that the total effort involved would be about 1000 hours of effort. The project is contracted at a rate of US$ 75 per hour of effort. If the project ended up with 1200 hours of effort, what would the contract payout be.
A project is contracted as a Cost-Plus-Incentive-Fee (CPIF) type of contract. The project is negotiated such that if the final costs are less than expected costs, the sharing formula for cost savings is 75:25. The targeted cost is US$ 100,000 with an 8% incentive fee on the targeted cost. If the project comes in at US$ 80,000, what would be the cost of the total contract?
Organizations strongly influence the project framework. The PMBOK Guide recognizes which of the following types of organizations?
During a work breakdown structure meeting you have decomposed the deliverables into work packages and created your WBS dictionary. However, you now want to decompose the work packages to assist you in estimating, executing and control the project. These decomposed work packages are called?
While having lunch with another project manager, he tells you that he underestimated the number of staff resources needed for his project by nearly 50%, but says he has plenty of reserves to cover the costs. During the next staff meeting, the same project manager says he has nothing new to report for his project and that all is progressing according to schedule. What do you do?
Accepted deliverables are an input to the Close Project or Phase process. These deliverables would have been accepted through which of the following processes?
Which of the following is not accurate about the initial phase of a project?
As part of the Define Scope process, a project manager documented the specific project assumptions associated with the project scope in the project scope statement. While reviewing this document, an experienced project manager pointed out that the project manager should also document:
Nancy has recently taken over a website development project. The project is already in execution and half of the project work has been completed. Nancy finds out that the stakeholder register does not contain any information about key stakeholders from the buyer of the product. What is the potential root cause of this issue?
The Control Procurements process ensures that the seller's performance meets contractual requirements and that the buyer performs according to the terms of the contract. This process is part of which process group?
You are currently leading a project and performing the work defined in the project management plan. This activity relates to which of the following processes?
One of the configuration management activities in the project involved capturing, storing and reporting configuration information needed to manage products and product information. This is known as:
Sharon has recently been asked to manage the deployment of an enterprise resource planning system for her organization. Sharon has sent her project sponsor a meeting request to discuss her project's stakeholder management plan. The sponsor believes that the stakeholder management planning is not relevant for such internal projects. The sponsor believes that only the scope, schedule and cost management plans are sufficient for such projects. The sponsor has asked Sharon to describe the objective of the meeting. Which of the following is the best response to this question?
The paint on the exotic cars that are manufactured in your plant is bubbling after about a year of application. What would be the BEST tool for your team to use to find potential causes of the peeling paint?
You are meeting with your team, early in the project, and would like to address all the strengths, weakness, opportunities and threats the project is facing. What tool should be used?
You are assigned to prepare the Procurement Management Plan for a project that involves setting up an org-wide supply chain management system. You are looking for a guideline on what type of contracts you can use and what type of contract forms are to be used for this project. Which source will help you obtain this?
You are in charge of constructing the Ferris wheel in each town a carnival visits. However, this is something you have never done before and you are getting different opinions from others on how long it takes. Joe, is new and has given you what you believe to be an optimistic estimate of 3 hours, Bill says it will take 10 hours, which seems too long to you and quite pessimistic. Lastly, Margie, who is the most experienced at this task is telling you it will take 8 hours. You are not sure who to believe, so you decide to do a PERT estimation, based on this you have determined it will take how many hours to assemble the Ferris wheel.
Rosemary is the project manager at a pharmaceutical company. She begins her day by analyzing her team's work requirements. She then assigns daily tasks to her team members over a centralized project management information system that then generates automatic task assignment notifications for the team members. Which of the following types of communication methods has been selected by Rosemary?
A project manager colleague of yours is currently working under contract on a short term project. He has expressed some concerns about finding work after the project ends. The project he is working on is currently ahead of schedule and he expects they will finish a month sooner than initially expected. What advice would be appropriate to provide him?
You have just returned from the weekly change control board meeting where you presented the requested changes to the employee move project. You had five change requests approved, however one rejected request. These are outputs of what process?
There are two activities on your schedule, which are: 1) Install server in lab 2) Move server into the data center. However, the second task can't start until the server has run in the lab for 5 days without failure. This is an example of what?
You just found out that a major subcontractor for your project consistently provides deliverables late. The subcontractor approaches you and asks you to continue accepting late deliverables in exchange for a decrease in project costs. This offer is an example of:
You have just been assigned a project with an unrealistic deadline. What do you do?
During your weekly status reports you are reporting the earned value for the project. This information is important for you and the stakeholders to gauge the progress of the project. What process group are the cost and schedule control part of?
You have your project team members record the time they spend on different activities during the day such as: programming, electrical, HVAC, etc. This is an example of a tool and technique in what process?
You are working with your team and are looking at the cost risks in the project. You are your team are currently creating a tornado diagram for the project risks. This is done as a part of which of the following processes?
Body language plays an important role in effective communications. This relates to which of the following communications dimensions?
You have taken over the management of a project from another project manager, who is a certified PMP. This project has been completed and is in the process of closing. You discover that there is no project schedule. What do you do?
You are in the execution stage of your project and you have been informed that "corporate" will be sending in a team of consultants to review whether your project activities comply with company's and PMI's policies, standards and procedures. This is an example of?
You are in the initiation phase of your project and believe the project can be completed for $100,000. However, you are an experienced project manager and know that many things can happen between the initiation phase and the closure of the project. You have provided an estimate in the project charter of $75,000 $175,000. This is an example of?
PMBOK recognizes five process groups typical of almost all projects. Which of the following is not one of them?
A technique that calculates multiple project durations with different sets of activity assumptions and variables is called:
A project team is currently assessing the project stakeholder management plan for its validity. The project documents are essential inputs to this process. Which of the following project documents must be used by the project team during this process?
A process that states how formal validation and acceptance of the completed project deliverables will be obtained is documented in the:
The WBS is a deliverable-oriented hierarchical decomposition of the work to be executed by the project team, to accomplish the project objectives. This is created as part of:
Which of the following Perform Quality Assurance techniques relates to root cause analysis and is used to identify a problem, discover the underlying causes, and develop preventive actions?
The process of auditing the quality requirements and the results from quality control measurements to ensure appropriate quality standards and operational definitions are used is the definition of:
Several of your resources report to another manager. You need them to participate in a series of project meetings over the next two weeks. How should you handle this?
A buyer has just received a final set of deliverables from the seller and finds that they do not conform to the specifications that were originally planned for. Ideally, where would the buyer expect to find documentation on how to handle non-conforming deliverables?
Two of your team members played the Mega Millions lottery and won! As much as they like working on your team, they have decided to retire. What plan should be updated?
You are running one week behind on a project due to the late delivery by a vendor. You are forced to compress your project schedule due to a government mandated end date that constrains your project. After meeting with your team, the decision is to work several tasks in parallel that were scheduled to be run consecutively. This is an example of?
When developing your project schedule, you have asked everyone to provide a list of planned vacations over the next 3 months and you have applied this into the tasks that each person is responsible for. This is an example of what tool?
A project has gone out of control and the project manager is trying to bring it back under control. There have been a number of changes to the project scope and some of the changes resulted in further changes such that the project cost spiraled and the project went out of schedule. This is known as:
You are working on a data center migration project and will be moving a mainframe system to another data center. However, you can't have any downtime when performing the move. The subject matter experts have various ideas regarding how this daunting task can be done, but the group is not coming to a consensus. You have decided that you will send out a questionnaire to the subject matter experts to get their views and risks on the project. You will then summarize the risks and approaches, and recirculate it to the subject matter experts. You are hoping to reach consensus after several rounds of this. What type of tool is being used?
You are managing a software development project. The project will involve working with a remote team. One of the requirements is to set up a secure communication link. The lead-time to setup the link is 45 days. Since the initial phase of the project involves requirements gathering, you feel that the link is required only after 3 months and are planning accordingly. You would typically do this planning activity in:
You are an experienced project manager and have managed several data center migration projects. You are currently conducting training on the databases, spreadsheets and management plans you will be using during the lifecycle of the project. This training is a tool and technique in what process?
You are managing an oil drilling project. With oil at $143 per barrel this could be a very lucrative project. However, there is a chance that the price of oil will drop below $105 per barrel, thus eliminating the profit in the project. This is an example of:
During the weekly change control board meeting, you invited the facilities manager to speak about the change request to increase the BTU's to the air conditioning system in the new data center. This is an example of what type of tool and technique in the Perform Integrated Change Control process?
You are managing a project that has a task to translate several pages of a document into Spanish. This is very similar to a project done last year where a document was translated into German. You are not sure how long it will take to translate into Spanish so you look at the project plan from the German translation and use the activity duration for your current project. What type of estimating is this an example of?
To control the schedule, a project manager is re-analyzing the project to predict project duration. This is done by analyzing the sequence of activities with the least amount of flexibility. What technique is being used?
A project manager creates a component-specific tool to verify that a set of required steps have been performed. This tool is called a:
A change request has just been formally documented and approved by the Change Control Board. The project manager now needs to communicate this to a project team member. Which of the following activities must the project manager necessarily do?
A project is estimated to cost $ 50,000 with a timeline of 50 days. After 25 days, the project manager finds that 50% of the project is complete and Actual costs are $ 50,000. What is the Cost Performance Index (CPI) ?
Your project is mid-way through a delivery schedule. As the project manager, you want to determine how much work is still left. Which is the most accurate way to determine the remaining work to be carried out by the project team?
An estimating technique that uses a statistical relationship between historical data and other variables (for example, square footage in construction, lines of code in software development) is known as:
Lucy is currently preparing a high-level cost estimate for her project in the initiation phase. Given the limited detail available to her, what would you expect the range of her estimate to be and what would you call such an estimate?
Funding requirements for a project are usually in incremental amounts that are not continuous, and these appear as a step function in the graph depicting Cash flow, Cost baseline and Funding. Any gap at the end of the project, between the funds allocated and the cost baseline represents:
As a project manager, you periodically do project performance reviews to compare cost performance over time, schedule activities or work packages over-running and under-running budget, milestones due, and milestones met. Which of the following is not a valid analytical technique?
A variance threshold for costs or other indicators to indicate the agreed amount of variation allowed is called:
Your company has just completed an unexpected round of layoffs. Morale is low, and resources are tighter than ever. Your project is now behind schedule because of the loss of resources. Overtime work will be required of everyone for the next several weeks in order to close the gap. One of the critical resources on your project has an upcoming vacation that was approved and scheduled months ago. However, without this resource you will be unable to get back on schedule. What do you do?
You are negotiating a contract with a seller. You want to go in for a Fixed price type of contract. The seller uses a different terminology for the fixed price type of contract. He is most probably referring to it as a:
A construction project requires that governmental environmental hearings be held prior to site preparation. What kind of a dependency is this?
Which of the following is the correct statement regarding the Identify Stakeholders process?
A project manager of a project that was contracted on a Time and Material basis finds that some of the tasks have been taking lesser time than planned. On average each team member has required only 30 hours to accomplish work which was planned for 40 hours during the week. The project manager should:
There are a number of risks that have been identified in your project. The team has elected not to change the project plan to deal with the risk, but they have established a contingency reserve of money in the event some of these risks are triggered. This is an example of what type of risk mitigation technique?
Large variations in the periodic expenditure of funds are undesirable for organizational operations. Therefore the expenditure of funds is frequently reconciled with the disbursement of funds for the project. According to the PMBOK, this is known as:
The Earned Value Management methodology can be used as a means to:
A project team is participating in a brainstorming meeting for a project. The project is in the planning phase. The team is trying to determine the current and preferred project stakeholder engagement levels and analyzing the gaps between these two states. They are also discussing different approaches and strategies that can be adopted to close these gaps. This relates to which of the following processes?
The State of New York has contracted your company to provide a claims payment system for Medicaid benefits. In the contract there is a clause that indicates that the State of New York can review your work processes and deliverables. This is an example of?
Mandatory dependencies are those that are inherent in the nature of the work being done. They often involve physical limitations, such as on a construction project where it is impossible to erect the superstructure until the foundation has been built. According to the PMBOK, this type of dependency is also called:
Jim's project is in execution. The cost management plan and the project budget were approved by all key stakeholders during the planning phase of the project. Recently, the finance manager of the company has notified Jim that his project funding might suffer as another higher priority project has been initiated by the company. Jim is surprised as his project was also a high priority project for the company. What should Jim immediately do?
The termination clause and alternative dispute resolution (ADR) mechanism for each procurement in a project is documented in:
Jack is the project manager of a project that is halfway through the execution. Jack is currently looking at the schedule of work. He adjusts a few of the schedule milestones and imposes date constraints for some of the work packages. This relates to which of the following processes?
As a project manager, you are concerned with both Prevention and Inspection of errors in a work product. The difference between Prevention and Inspection is:
A storm has damaged the manufacturing facility that is being constructed as part of your project. You have just discovered that, although the project risk management plan mandated that the facility be insured against damage and loss, this policy was never acquired and the losses now have to be covered by the project budget. Who is at fault
You have a schedule activity that can be delayed without delaying the early start date of any subsequent activities. This is an example of?
As the project manager of a project, you have needed to estimate certain activity durations before all project team members were acquired. On acquisition of the project team, you find that the actual competency levels of the acquired team members are much lower than what you had anticipated. In such a case, you will:
The Executive VP of Finance has informed you that you will be the Project Manager for an energy audit the company is performing in order to save expenses. He has tasked you to identify the stakeholders and to start documenting the high-level assumptions and constraints. Your project is in what stage?
On a control chart, if six consecutive plot points are above the mean, then what can be established about the process?
A software vendor on your project is hoping to be awarded a contract providing software for another project at your company. You are not the manager of the other project. However, the vendor offers you tickets to an upcoming professional sports event if you will "put in a good word" for his company to vendor selection team of the other project. What do you do?
A point in time that a project or project phase is authorized to its completion is called:
A project manager is managing a project where there are teams located in remote locations in order to obtain cost savings. This is in line with organizational guidelines which require that at least 25% of work should be done from a remote location. This is an example of:
The Project Manager controls the interfacing and overlapping areas of the organization's procurement processes, and the project schedule with processes from this area:
Throughout various project meetings you have documented differences in opinion, situations to be investigated and emerging or unanticipated responsibilities. These are all inputs to what document?
Juliana is managing a complex multimillion dollar project. The number of the project stakeholders is high and most of the project stakeholders are heavily interested in the project. Providing daily project updates to the project stakeholders is becoming difficult for Juliana because of the effort required to prepare and distribute this information. In this situation, which of the following can help Juliana prepare and distribute the project information?
You are working on an upgrade to a call distribution system for a call center, however you are finding it extremely difficult to get the proper resources assigned and tasks completed because the Call Center Manager is in control of the budget. You have just realized that you work in what type of an organization?
You have completed a milestone in your software development project and you are now verifying that the product meets the specifications outlined in the project management plan. What process group is this process in?
Project performance appraisals are different from team performance assessment in that project performance appraisals focus on?
You are working on a project where a negative risk has occurred. However, you have no contingency plan for this risk. You call a meeting and a solution is devised to change the workflow until a permanent solution can be implemented. This is an example of?
You have been asked to fill in for another project manager while he is on vacation. During the next project status meeting, you ask for a risk report. The project team says they have never reported on that before, and are unsure if there is a master project risk log. What do you do?
Which of the following process groups involves people and resources coordination, stakeholder management, as well as integrating and performing the activities of the project in accordance with the project management plan?
Megawatt is estimating the overall expected cost of a new ERP system deployment project using the actual costs of an earlier similar ERP system deployment project as the basis for the cost. This is what type of estimating?
Costs incurred in one area of a project can offset costs in another area of the same project. However, it is not the best practice to consider only the costs of project execution when making project decisions. What must also be considered?
Your company is way behind schedule in the deployment of a government mandated change to a health care processing system that must be in production by the end of the year. You and your team have met and decided to hire an additional 50 programmers to work with the existing staff on the activities in order to meet the due date. This is an example of what?
You are managing a fund raising golf tournament that has a hole-in-one contest. However, your company can't afford to pay the $1,000,000 award if someone does get a hole in one, so they have elected to take out an insurance policy in the event that someone does get lucky. This is an example of?
The Make-or-Buy analysis is a technique that is used as part of the Plan Procurement Management process. It is used to determine whether a particular product or service can be produced by the project team or should it be purchased. The analysis to arrive at a decision should include:
Fill in the blank: ______________ includes the processes required to ensure that the project includes all the work required, and only the work required, to complete the project successfully.
Breaking down project activities into smaller components in order to obtain a more accurate cost estimate is called:
All of the following are characteristics of a project, EXCEPT:
The Quality Policy is the intended direction of a performing organization with regard to quality. As a project manager in a performing organization, you find that the organization lacks a formal quality policy. What should be done in such a case?
For your weekly project status review meetings, you set some time aside on the agenda to review the risk register and review the project risks. You ensure that the response plans are still appropriate and add or delete risks as necessary. This is an example of?
You are setting up your project team and you are looking at a chart that shows that the programming will be performed by Systems Development, the infrastructure will be implemented by Infrastructure Systems, the customer communication will be handled by the Call Center. This is an example of what type of chart?
A large construction project for a logistics company will require the expenditure of a large amount of capital. The finance group works with the project manager to project set limits when expenses will be incurred in a given project, and determine if there are ways to smooth out or level the spending to avoid a single large expenditure one quarter and none the next. This is an example of:
Calculation of late finish dates and late start dates for the uncompleted portion of the project is called____________.
The following text is an example of ___________________. "WBS Element 2.3.1.8. System Deployment Testing Planning This element includes the effort to identify requirements for and methodology of testing systems to be deployed."
Susan is currently developing her project's stakeholder register. She wants to identify the internal and external parties that are involved in the project. Which of the following documents can provide this information to Susan?
While rating a proposal, one of the requirements was "The proposed project manager needs to be a certified Project Management Professional, PMP(R) " This is an example of:
Which of the following is Deming's formula for continuous improvement?
A decision tree is a Perform Quantitative Risk Analysis technique that is structured around using a Decision Tree Diagram. It describes a situation under consideration and the implications of each of the available choices and the possible scenarios. A Decision Tree Diagram shows how to make a decision between alternative capital strategies known as:
As part of the Close Procurements process, the project manager prepared a complete set of indexed contract documentation, including the closed contract, to include with the final project files. This is called a:
Michael is managing a multi-million dollar project. The project is in the planning phase and has a big number of key stakeholders. During an analysis, Michael finds out that there are big gaps between the current and desired engagement levels for most of the key stakeholders. What should Michael do next?
A project manager determines that there are 15 communication channels in the project. The number of stakeholders in the project must then be:
Defense Dynamics has been awarded a fixed price project to design and build a military cargo jet. The design team is looking at ways to increase the cargo capacity of the plane while keeping manufacturing costs and the fuel efficiency of the final product within specific limits. The engineers on this team have identified factors that affect capacity, costs, and fuel efficiency and have created a statistical model of how these factors impact each other. The outcome of this model is a design with the highest cargo capacity and fuel efficiency at the lowest cost possible. What type of mathematical model is this called?
Organizational process assets are key inputs to the Manage Stakeholder Engagement process. The key elements of the organizational process assets utilized during this process are organizational communication requirements, issue management procedures and the change control procedures. Which of the following is also a key organizational process asset that must be considered during this process?
Sometimes the broader, more comprehensive summary activity is also referred to as:
Select the best answer: Continuous process improvement reduces _____________ and ________, which allows processes to operate at increased levels of efficiency and effectiveness.
You have just learned that your project's sole equipment supplier has gone out of business. This is an unanticipated risk, and will cause a delay in the project until a new vendor can be selected and contracts put in place. What do you do?
You are managing the communication requirements for your project. You find that certain general management skills come into play as part of managing stakeholder requirements and that there are different dimensions to communication that you have to plan for as the sender of information. Which of the following is not a dimension of communicating?
Accounting for the limited resources in the project schedule is called:
You find out that a project team member has been stealing some material from the work place. You accidentally discover this and he says that he is very sorry about it, and will not repeat it again. You will:
As part of the Develop Team process, the project manager of a project has planned for some Team Building activities. Team Building Activities should take place throughout the project life cycle, but have greater benefit when conducted:
During a project status meeting, a new project manager has reported that there is a two week delay in acquiring a key resource for a task on the critical path in her project. She also states that she has built 3 weeks of float into the project schedule. What do you do?
Collect Requirements, Develop Schedule and Perform Qualitative Risk Analysis are all part of what process group?
You have assembled a group of subject matter experts (SMEs) to perform an exercise where they are going to complete a probability and impact matrix chart. You and your team are still in what process group?
Stakeholders can be identified in which management process group(s)?
A project is being done for an external customer. Which of the following is not an input to the Develop Project Charter process?
A project manager is currently performing the Control Stakeholder Engagement process for his project. The stakeholder management plan has not been delivering the desired results so far. The project manager is now struggling to come up with a new strategy to manage his project stakeholders. Which of the following can provide some guidance to the project manager in this situation?
You have the project management responsibility of a virtual team comprising team members from the same company who live in widespread geographic areas; employees who work from home-offices and employees with mobility handicaps. Virtual teams are formed as a result of which of the following processes?
Visiting a construction site to ensure the work being done is the same work called out in the requirements is called:
A Responsibility Assignment Matrix illustrates the connections between the work that needs to be done and the project team members. A RACI chart is a type of Responsibility Assignment matrix where the names of the roles being documented are:
While reviewing project procurement and accounting records for your project, you discover that there is a pattern of unauthorized expenses by a specific resource. These expenses are not within the scope of the project, and have been somewhat camouflaged within a number of large and complicated expense reports. What do you do?
Due to the unexpected release of a similar product from a competitor, the Widgets International executive team has stepped up the pressure on the product team to release the Widget product 3 months earlier. The project manager uses what technique to shorten the schedule but maintain the project scope?
Which of the following indicates the required cost performance in order to completed the project on budget?
A project to design and build a new aircraft is cancelled after the project has been underway for some time. What process is invoked to document what work was done, and to what extent it was completed?
Vendor selection and management and documentation of lessons learned are tasks that fall under this process area:
You are managing a project which requires an environmental permit to do work. The approval is in the final stages of being granted when a confidential, reliable report is brought to your notice which indicates that there is a high risk of an environmental hazard due to the project. Your manager tells you that it is better to keep quiet at this stage since the loss due to non-starting/execution of the project is very high. You will:
Performance reporting is a tool and technique of which of the following processes?
Which of the following is not a Risk-Diagramming Technique?
The most recent analysis of Microcorp's new fabrication facility renovation shows a CPI value of less than 1.0 What does this indicate?
The degree to which the amount or volume of risk than an organization will withstand is:
Probability distributions are frequently used in Perform Quantitative Risk Analysis. Which of these is not a valid example of such a distribution?
Project performance measurements are used to assess the magnitude of variation from the original scope baseline. Once the degree of scope variation is known, what step is performed next?
You are a non-technical project manager. Two highly skilled and knowledgeable resources on your project are in conflict over the best technical solution to meet a project requirement. It is not impacting the project schedule, however. Who is initially responsible for the conflict resolution?
You have been assigned as project manager of a software development project. One of the requirements is to use a remote team and you find that that the remote team has limited technical communications capabilities. This is an example of:
A project manager presented Earned value analysis data in a tabular format while providing a performance report. An alternative way in which the project manager could have presented the Earned value analysis data is by using:
Which of the following endeavors is unlikely to be a project?
Mary is managing a process improvement project. She is currently identifying her project stakeholders and populating the stakeholder register. The project sponsor has asked Mary to use the project's procurement documents as an input to this process as well. What could be the reason behind this request?
An issue log or action-item log is a tool that can be used to document and monitor the resolution of issues. At a minimum, the issue log should contain:
As the project manager of a large project, you have just completed the Estimate Costs process. As you begin the Determine Budget process, which of the following would you require as inputs?
Sam has been assigned to build a new office facility for his organization. Sam finds out that there are a big number of key stakeholders that are neutral to the project. Sam's stakeholder management strategy must focus on?
A collection of formally documented procedures that define how project deliverables and documentation are controlled, changed and approved is called:
A cost, time, quality, technical or resource value is used as a parameter and included in product specifications. Crossing this value triggers some action such as an exception report. This value would be called:
The costs on a project are typically classified as direct and indirect costs. The cost of electric utilities for the office would be considered as:
Barbara is managing an educational program design project. The project is in a very early phase of the project lifecycle. This is a multi-million dollar project and active involvement of the project key stakeholders is critical for the success of the project. Barbara has formed a board of project stakeholders so that all the key stakeholders can be kept engaged. Most of the key stakeholders have been conflicting with each other in the recent past. Most of the times, the nature of these conflicts have been personal rather than professional. However, no conflicts have yet arisen on the current project. Which of the following management skills must be applied by Barbara during the initial board meetings?
Which of the following is considered an output from the Direct and Manage Project Work process?
Long hours to meet a looming deadline and immense pressure for success from management is causing a downturn in team morale. Occasionally there are conflicts between team members over priorities and resources. How should these non-disruptive conflicts be handled?
One of the senior team members, who is the best performer in your project plays 'favorites' and a few of the team members who work closely with him, have got very good appraisal reports in the past, even though they may not have deserved it. As the project manager, what would you need to proactively do?
The accuracy of estimates of the cost of a project will ____________________ over the life of a project.
The development of requirements in the Collect Requirements process begins with an analysis of the information contained in the _________ and _________.
What do buyers and seller have in common with regards to Control Procurements?
Your most recent quality control chart shows that all data points measured fall within the control range. However, there is a group of 8 consecutive data points sitting above the mean. What do you do?
Melissa is managing a hardware deployment project, and is creating a risk management plan. Which of the following would NOT be included in this plan?
You are decomposing your WBS into smaller pieces of work. What is one item that does NOT describe how far the work should be decomposed?
A fellow project manager is retiring and moving to the mountains, you will be taking over his project. Before he leaves he tells you the project is on schedule, but only because he has had to "put the hammer down" on his project team and push them relentlessly. Pushing the team to perform activities to accomplish project objectives is a part of:
A technique which enhances brainstorming with a voting process used to rank the most useful ideas so that they can be taken up for further brainstorming is:
Ian's project is in execution. During the monitoring and controlling of the project, Ian finds out that the current stakeholder management strategy needs to be thoroughly reviewed. He invites selected key stakeholders and some subject matter experts to brainstorm on new ideas and approaches that can be used. Ian is planning to facilitate the session himself. The planed session in this scenario is an example of?
Your project team is having a dispute with a vendor about whether a specific task is within the scope of the project. The scope statement does not provide implementation level details that would resolve this discussion. There is not a WBS however, because the project sponsor insisted that the project be started right away, without pausing to create standard project planning documentation. Who is at fault?
Which of the following is not a tool or technique of the Manage Stakeholder Engagement process?
Factors that influence conflict resolution methods include EXCEPT:
You are the project manager for a Fortune 100 IT company and you are currently engaged in an important project. You want to choose the best contractor for a specialized task. What should you do to evaluate potential contractors?
Your have recently finished an advanced project management training course that was paid for by your project budget. Because the budget for your project is not large enough to train any other resources on the project, your manager has asked you to make copies of the course materials and distribute them to the rest of the staff. What do you do?
A project manager is performing Reserve Analysis as a technique in one of the project management process that he is currently working on. Which of these is likely to be that process?
You are forming a virtual project team that includes members from four different countries around the world. What is NOT an obstacle that you must overcome to build an effective team?
Joe is attempting to calculate the average financial impact of some future uncertain scenarios. What method could he use?
You took over a project from an individual who was let go. You are reading the project documentation and found the project charter was signed by five managers. What should be your primary concern at this time?
A company is looking for an experienced Project Manager to manage a large construction project. You meet all of the requirements for the position except for one. The organization is looking for a certified PMP with five years of experience and you have four years of experience managing similar projects. What is the BEST way to fill out your application?
Hillbrand Dairies is structured so project managers share responsibility with the functional managers for assigning priorities and directing the work of persons assigned to the project. This is an example of a ____________organization.
Bill is the project manager of a software project that is originally estimated to complete in 12 months. 2 months into the project, it is discovered that the original estimating assumptions were fundamentally flawed. The Estimate at Completion (EAC) in such a project will be:
How would you calculate your EAC if the ETC work will be performed at the budgeted rate?
The most effective method of resolving conflict or other issues with stakeholders is____________.
Gordon has recently taken over a project as the project manager. The project is already halfway through the execution. Reviewing the project management plan, Gordon found outs that the project's WBS is not aligned with the project management plan and the 100% rule was ignored. What does this mean?
A project manager is unsure of the difference between precision and accuracy and asks for your help in understanding the difference between the two terms. Which of these responses would be the best response to such a question?
There is a serious defect in the finished product of a project that was completed a few months back and this results in a recall campaign to recall the defective products. What would be the best classification for these types of costs?
You are the project manager of a project and have come up with a bar graph of problems and their frequencies. This kind of a chart is called a:
Which of the following relates to Root Cause Analysis?
Which of the following tools is used during Trend Analysis?
An automotive designer uses a certain technique to determine which combination of suspension and tires will produce the most desirable ride characteristics at a reasonable cost. In order to do this, she works with a statistical framework and systematically changes all of the important parameters instead of changing the factors one at a time. This is known as:
At division project status meeting, a dashboard of cost metrics for each project is distributed to all attendees, and each project manager is presenting the status of their project. The metrics for one project show a BAC of $1100, an EV of $998, and a EAC of $1099. However the project manager is reporting an ETC of $354 in her presentation. What do you do?
The key components of the basic model of communication between two parties are:
Your team has built an exotic sports car for a wealthy client. Every deliverable has been verified by the project team against the quality requirements and accepted by the client. Now the Project Manager is reviewing the car to ensure it meets the specifications of the client, as agreed to in the project plan. What project management process is represented here?
Jonathan has recently been hired in a company as a business improvement manager. Jonathan has been asked to reorganize the company's meetings and reporting structure. Jonathan is currently identifying all key project stakeholders. Which of the following enterprise environmental factors is least likely to be used as an input to this process?
Skills such as empathy, influence, creativity, and group facilitation are valuable assets when managing the project team. These skills are often referred to as ______________.
Gary is a project manager wrapping up the construction of a new office building. He creates several documents during this process. Which of the following is not applicable to the Close Procurements process?
A project risk manager distributes anonymous questionnaires to project team members to help identify risks. This is called ___________.
Bill is managing a simple construction project. For this project, the stakeholder register exists, but the stakeholder management plan was not developed during the planning phase of the project. During the project execution, a big number of change requests came in and got approved. Bill now believes that a formal stakeholder management plan should be in place in order to guarantee the project's success. What must Bill do?
Tim is the project manager of a project that has a timeline of 18 months. Tim has planned for daily status reports to be sent out to all stakeholders. After receiving two such reports, the project sponsor informs Tim that she would only like to have fortnightly reports. Tim had done an analysis of communications requirements and considered various attributes for the communications management plan. What aspect has he missed out, which resulted in a daily status report being sent out instead of fortnightly status reports?
A software development project team has determined the best way to mitigate the risk of not having the computational resources to complete all bug testing on schedule is to add 3 more servers to the test bed. However, the network may not have enough capacity to handle the extra load of those three servers and could fail. This type of risk is called a _______________ risk.
Which of the following enterprise environmental factors is not applicable to the Plan Human Resource Management process?
As part of the quality control in your project, you are looking at a technique which shows the history and pattern of variation. This is a line graph which shows data points plotted in the order in which they occurred. You are most likely looking at a:
Elizabeth is managing a software development project. During one of the project update meetings, one of the key stakeholders raised a serious concern about the new project management approach being applied on the project. The rest of the stakeholders are comfortable with the new project management approach being used. What should Elizabeth do?
You are assisting another project manager interview candidates for a resource position on his project. While reviewing your interview notes together, the other project manager sorts the candidate's resumes into two groups: one for further interviews, the other for candidates that did not meet the requirements for the position. You notice that he has placed several of the highly qualified candidates in the second pile, stating that those interviewees "did not fit the corporate profile." Upon further review, you discover that these candidates are all of the same ethnic group. What do you do?
You are a PMP reviewing project files to help you write a lessons learned document on a software project you are finishing. Which of the following is not a part of a project file?
Organizational process assets are an input to all of the following Stakeholder Management processes EXCEPT:
After receiving some news about a delay on one of your project tasks, you reviewed the schedule to determine how it will impact the project. While there is a substantial delay on this task, it is not a critical path item and will not impact delivery of any of your milestones. Another project manager advises you to only present the milestone chart during your meeting with the project stakeholders and tell them the project is progressing as planned. What do you do?
The project manager in charge of a new credit card software project has asked the product manager to create a checklist to assist with the identification of risks. A risk checklist can be created from which of the following sources?
A planning technique used to provide products, services and results that truly reflect customer requirements by translating those customer requirements into the appropriate technical requirements for each phase of project product development is called:
You have utilized 360-degree feedback techniques for your information gathering and are in the process of giving formal feedback to team members. You will be setting specific goals for employees for the remainder of the project. Which technique are you utilizing?
You are a project manager who is in charge of an important project for your company. The project includes producing widgets for your customer. Data has been collected to help identify the greatest causes of defects in the overall process. Which technique should you use to determine the correlation between two variables being analyzed?
During the planning phase of your project, your team decided to procure a certain brand of hardware because it had the lowest price and free shipping and installation. This approach saved $6,000 over the other brands being considered. Since that purchase, however, it has been discovered that the annual maintenance costs for this hardware are $2,500 per year, and $12,500 over the life of the hardware. These costs were not budgeted in the project, nor were they included in the TCO analysis that was done as part of the project business case. What should you do?
A risk with a positive outcome is called an ___________.
During a project status review meeting, some of the project team members have raised a concern over the complexity of the project performance information reporting requirements. The project team is of the view that the work performance data should be sufficient for reporting. Which of the following is the best response that should be given to team members?
You are an inexperienced project manager who has been appointed to manage a project in a matrix organization. Because of this you can expect the communication in this project to be:
Which of the following estimating techniques will cost less, but is also generally less accurate?
A project manager is using a Risk Diagramming technique that is a graphical representation of situations showing causal influences, time ordering of events and other relationships among variables and outcomes. This would be:
You are authorized to approve expenditures above $15,000. For the last several weeks you have been negotiating the terms and pricing of a contract with a vendor, and you want to keep costs as low as possible. This has been a very difficult negotiation process. A colleague suggests you tell the vendor you can only approve expenses below $10,000 as a way to keep the price low. What do you do?
A project manager wants to understand a project goal in relation to the steps for getting to that goal. Which of the following is a useful method for contingency planning that aids a team in anticipating intermediate steps that could derail achievement of a project goal?
You are a project manager for Enormous Co. and are currently engaged in a highly visible project. The company is about to implement an independent review to ensure that the project work is continuing to comply with the project's policies, processes, and procedures. During which process would this review occur?
A project comprises of a virtual team with team members located in different offices in the same city as well as across different cities. The project manager wishes to built trust and good working relationships. One of the best ways to do this is:
Which option is NOT representative of the inputs, tools and techniques, and outputs of the Direct and Manage Project Work process?
As part of the Risk Response planning for your project, you are trying to come up with a strategy to deal with negative risks or threats. In order to eliminate the impact of a particular risk, you relax the objective that is in jeopardy by extending the project schedule. This is an example of
Perform Qualitative analysis of a risk is a quick way to prioritize how a project team will respond to risks. It is based on risk _________________ and _________________.
A project manager was assigned to a project as the project charter was being developed. Which of the following is an input that the project manager will utilize to develop the project charter?
The Work Breakdown Structure (WBS) is a deliverable-oriented hierarchical decomposition of the work to be executed by the project team, to accomplish the project objectives and create required deliverables. The 'Create WBS' is a process under which Knowledge Area?
Gene is the project manager of a large highway expansion project. He has a number of stakeholders with competing priorities and agendas, and often has to resolve conflicts between stakeholders. Which knowledge area manages communications with the project stakeholders?
There are 10 stakeholders in Megamart's ERP deployment project. How many potential communications channels are there?
A project team is trying to solve a moderately complex problem. The have generated data using affinity diagrams. That data possess intertwined logical relationships. Which of the following tool can help the team analyze these intertwined relationships?
Ken is managing a project where the morale of the team is very low. The team members have been on the project for more than a year and though the project is due to end in a few weeks' time, they do not know what is in store for them. What should Ken have planned better to avoid such a situation?
You are the project manager of a project whose team has interacted with a number of stakeholders. You feel that in order to have a very objective project performance appraisal, you would like to obtain feedback for the project team members from all the people they have worked with, including superiors, peers and subordinates. Project performance appraisals are carried out during which of the following processes?
Which of the following is not a tool and technique of the Plan Human Resource Management process?
Which of these is not an Enterprise environmental factor that can influence the Plan Human Resource Management process?
Which of the following is not provided by the communications management plan?
You are managing a project. An audit team wants to know where they can find information on training plans for the project team members and certification requirements. This would be found in the:
You are managing a project and find that you need to apply resource leveling. Which of the following tools can help you identify resources that are over allocated?
Which of the following is not among the processes of Project Communications Management?
Your project is nearing completion, but a previously unidentified risk has been discovered and it could significantly affect one of the project deliverables. What do you do?
A team of engineers is reviewing the architecture diagram for a new ERP system being deployed at a large accounting firm. The engineers are discussing the impact of the failure of each node in the diagram on overall availability of the final product. The intent of the discussion is to minimize the likelihood of failure and the effects of any failure. What is this called?
As a project manager based at the customer location for a performing organization, you strike up a rapport with a customer manager. As the project progresses, the manager asks you to make certain changes to the project scope and wants this to be handled on an informal basis. You should:
You are in the midst of a major code roll out for a new software module. However, it has come to your attention that the resources promised for the roll out are not going to be available. As the Project Manager, what is the BEST thing to do?
The Identify Stakeholders process is an initiating process. At this stage, which of the following organizational process assets is the most crucial input to this process?
The project management team performed activities such as measuring examining and verifying to determine whether work and deliverables met requirements and product acceptance criteria. Which of the following choices refers to a different set of activities than the ones just mentioned?
___________________ is performed on risks that have been prioritized by the Perform Qualitative Risk Analysis process as potentially and substantially impacting the project.
Which of the following documents will help trace the requirements to product design?
As the Project Manager for Midway Carnival Rides, you are starting off on the Define Scope process. Which of the following is a key input to the process?
Neil is the project documents controller for a multi-million dollar telecom network deployment project. Neil has just received a document from the project manager. This document contains the project stakeholders' communication requirements for the current project phase. Neil should update which of the following project documents with this information?
A key output of Plan Human Resource Management is a list of project roles and responsibilities. What should this document include?
As the project manager of a high-visibility project, you are in the process of Identifying risks. You are concerned that the data you collect might be biased. A technique that helps keep the bias out of the data and keeps any one person from having undue influence on the outcome is:
A project manager is giving a project update to the key stakeholders. During the meeting, he finds out that most of the stakeholders are busy checking and replying to their emails. Which of the following is the best action that could have eliminated this issue?
You are a Project Manager working on a project to create high efficiency electric motors for a company introducing a new electric golf cart. Your company's president is keenly interested in the project and requests a chart that shows the number of defects by type ordered by their frequency of occurrence. Which type of chart would BEST meet this request?
What term defines the work needed to complete a product, service, or result?
During a weekly status meeting a team member suggests adding a component to the project. As the project manager, you indicate that all focus should be put on the current scope and don't worry about any enhancements. Focusing on the current scope is an example of?
What type of method can be used to eliminate personal bias during the process of selecting a seller?
You have been offered a position managing a project that will last 12 months. However, you know that in 6 months you will be relocating to another state for family reasons. What should you do?
A project manager wants to proactively monitor a manufacturing process in order to determine if the quality level is within acceptable limits for that process. What tool will help with this?
You are planning a storage device migration in a data center. During this phase of the project, who should be controlling the project?
As project manager, you find you are constantly dealing with conflict amongst your team members. Everyone argues over sharing available project resources so you plan to use a conflict resolution method to alleviate the tension between team members. What conflict resolution method is NOT recognized by the Project Management Institute?
In a project that was yet to begin, many of the project team members were known in advance. This is called:
You have been managing a construction project in a developing country and are closing down the project. The tools and equipment that was used on the project has to be returned to your company's European headquarters. A non-governmental organization that builds and repairs medical facilities in this country has come to you to request that this equipment be donated to them. What should you do?
All of the following are components of an effective change control, EXCEPT:
What similarity exists between a cost-reimbursable contract and a time and material contract?
Failure Mode and Effect Analysis (FMEA) is a non-proprietary approach to Quality Management. This is an analytical procedure in which:
A team of engineers is reviewing a scatter diagram to determine how the changes in two variables in a new type of automobile tire are related. The closer points on the diagram are to a diagonal line, _______________.
A project team collects project work performance data and transforms that into work performance information for the key project stakeholders on a monthly basis. Which of the following does not provide a good platform to share this information with the stakeholders?
You are a project manager who is in charge of an important project for your company. The project is 40% complete after 3 months and has cost $350,000. The budget for the project is $950,000 and is scheduled to last 8 months. How is the project performing?
How will an organization with a weak matrix organization structure affect the Plan Human Resource Management process?
Product scope is measured against the product requirements whereas project scope is measured against:
In the procurement process, the seller may be viewed initially as a bidder, then as the selected source and then as the contracted supplier. The seller will typically manage the work as a project. In such an instance, which of the following is not true?
The product design your project team developed was very well received by the customer. There were two key contributors to this design. The customer calls you to tell you how pleased he is with the design. What do you tell him?
Lori is managing a project in a Functional organization. In this organization, she can expect to find that:
Tom is a project manager who is assigned to a foreign country to manage a project. The project is a large one and comprises of smaller sub-teams, contributing to the entire project. As part of rewards and recognition within the project, Tom plans for a team award for the best sub-team. The Recognition and Rewards is associated with which of the following processes?
A first-time project manager was assigned to a project that had a duration of 3 months. In order to gain a head start in the project, she took an older, completed project and incorporated all the tools, techniques and checklists from that project in their entirety into the current one. The older project had been completed in 14 months' time and was very similar in nature. The most appropriate comment on this would be:
A first-time project manager decided that he would have a 'perfect project'. He informed the customer that this project would not accept change requests of any kind and the scope would need to be detailed out accurately right at the start of the project. The customer agreed to this request. What would your comment on this situation be?
A project manager has scheduled technical training for her project team members in order to increase their skills. During which of the following processes these trainings will be delivered to the team members?
A project is contracted as a Cost-Plus-Fixed-Fee (CPFF) type of contract. The targeted cost is US$ 200,000 with a fee of US$ 30,000. If the project comes in at US$ 170,000, what would be the cost of the total contract?
A project is contracted as a Cost-Plus-Incentive-Fee (CPIF) type of contract. The project is negotiated such that if the final costs are less than expected costs, the sharing formula for cost savings is 80:20. The targeted cost is US$ 500,000 with a 10% fee. If the project comes in at US$ 450,000, what would be the cost of the total contract?
A project is contracted as a Cost-Plus-Fixed-Fee (CPFF) type of contract with a fee of 10% of estimated costs. The estimated cost is US$ 50,000. If the project comes in at US$ 75,000 with no changes in project scope, what would be the total cost of the contract?
You are fairly new to project management, but have been successfully managing a small project and now management has given you another project to manage, which you are excited about. However, the new project is growing exponentially everyday, you have also learned a project manager you work with managed a similar project last year. What should you do?
You are the project manager from a seller organization, based at the customer location. One of your team members is involved in certain unacceptable activities at the customer location. The HR manager of the customer team organizes a meeting between you, the team-member, your customer-manager and HR wherein the team member apologizes for his activities and agrees not to repeat them. You should:
You have been asked by your project manager to help them create a chart that illustrates the project resources that will be working on each work package. What would be the best type of chart to use?
As the project manager of a development project, you are aware that there is a slight defect in the product developed, as a result of which it will fail to meet certain regulatory standards. This was due to faulty requirements. You are also aware that the product will continue to function properly even though it fails to meet that standard. Your customer manager asks you to certify that the product meets the necessary regulatory standards, stating that this will not be verified when the report is submitted to the necessary authorities, so there is no issue with your certifying. Your stance is that:
The selection of life cycle for the project, the processes to be applied to each phase, and the results of the tailoring by the project management team are usually found in the:
You are managing a project for your company constructing an office complex in another country. The construction work on 2 of the buildings is complete and is ready for move-in. However, the construction foreman informs you that a fee must be paid to a local government agency in order to be issued an occupancy permit for all new construction in that country. What should you do?
You are a Project Manager for a company that designs and develops automation systems for car companies. You are in the Close Project process for a project in which a new automation system has been designed and created for a car company located in Korea. You need to obtain formal acceptance for the new automation system. All of the following statements are true with respect to the final acceptance of the new system EXCEPT?
You are the Project Manager of a large IT project. A manager from a company contracted to work on the project offers you free tickets to a local sporting event. The tickets are expensive but your organization has no formal policy regarding gifts. What is the BEST way to handle the offer?
Susan is managing a multi-million dollar shopping complex construction project. The buyer of the project is an external entity. After identifying all the key and major project stakeholders, Susan is now planning to carry out a comprehensive stakeholder analysis. Which of the following is not involved with the stakeholder analysis?
As project manager, you scheduled a status update meeting. During the meeting, a problem developed and the group discussed it. The day after the meeting, Kevin approached you and expressed his concern that the problem was not really resolved. After thinking about it, he felt that his concerns were still valid and should be addressed. What conflict resolution method was likely used at the status meeting?
You are a project manager for your company. Part of the project requires producing 10,000 widgets, which your company will outsource. The company has agreed to pay all related costs and 5% of the estimated project costs. What type of contract has been negotiated?
You are the Project Manager for JT's Lumber Yard. You are trying to forecast estimates for the last phase of the project you are currently working on. Based on the performance of the project to date, which formula can be used to estimate the total value of the project when completed assuming similar variances will not occur?
You work as an engineer for a large engineering firm. The last week you have been corresponding back and fourth with the supervisor of your department about the horizontal stabilizers required for the wings on a new aircraft you are designing. Which communication dimension does this represent?
During the execution of a project, a need is felt to make major changes to the project stakeholder management plan. What must the project manager do first?
A measure taken to bring future results in line with the project plan BEST describes?
Stacy is producing a documentary on African wildlife. Although the project key stakeholders are very supportive of the project, Stacy believes that there are some stakeholders' concerns that might become major problems in the future. What should Stacy do?
You have been asked to create a graphical display of schedule-related information listing schedule activities on the left side of the chart, dates on the top, and activity durations as date-placed horizontal bars on the right side. What would such a chart be called?
Which of the following techniques can help clarify the structure, requirements, and other terms of the purchases so that mutual agreement can be reached prior to signing the contract between a buyer and a seller?
A complicated software project was authorized by a project sponsor. However, the users who were intended to use the product found it very difficult to articulate their requirements. What technique can be employed to elicit requirements for such a project?
The manager of a project, that your company is running in another country, is at the corporate headquarters for a company-wide project management meeting. During a break, you overhear the project manager discussing payments made to local municipal governments for construction permits for his project. Your company has a strict policy about paying or taking bribes. What should you do?
A project has several teams. Team C has repeatedly missed deadlines in the past. This has caused team D to have to crash the critical path several times. As the team leader for team D, you receive word that the next deadline may also be missed. You should meet with the:
A project manager would find team development to be the MOST difficult in which type of organization?
Johan is a project manager working for a Norwegian accounting firm. To get results, Johan often tells team members that if deadlines are not met, he will have to discuss their performance with their functional managers. Johan's organization can not be a:
The project sponsor asks you to increase budget estimates by 25% to ensure that enough funds are budgeted for the project. What should you do?
You are the project manager for a project and have just entered the third year of a scheduled four year project. You need to evaluate new risks that have emerged since the project began. What should you perform to provide this information?
What is the BEST tool and technique that provides the expected cost of a procurement and helps identify significant variations from cost estimates prepared in-house?
Which of the following should be done FIRST during the Project Life Cycle?
A project team has recently computed the project's current schedule and cost performance indices. They have also calculated the new estimate to complete and the TCPI based on the new estimate at completion. The project key stakeholders are not fully aware of the earned value management process. These measures in this case are an example of?
You are the Project Manager for GeoThermal Systems. Which of the following must be done FIRST before proceeding with a new project?
You are a Project Manager for an automotive parts company. Your organization has been hired to produce clutches for an exotic car company which will involve the design and production of custom clutches. During the course of the project you are reviewing a quality control statistics chart that examines every clutch produced for the month and notice several cases where the spring component of the clutch is expanding with too much force and is falling outside the upper control limit. Which type of Quality Control tool are you MOST LIKELY making use of?
You are the Project Manager for Wicked Fast Cars, Corp. You are working on a project for the Human Resources department that is scheduled to take one year. After three months into the project, you calculate the EV at $35,000 and the PV at $45,000. Which option below represents the value for the SV?
You are a Project Manager creating the final project file. Which information would you NOT include in this file?
The sponsor of your facilities upgrade project has left the company to another organization. Few weeks later, you are reviewing the business case for the project and discover that there are several inconsistencies between what is stated in the business case and what is described in the project scope. Further research shows that the business case as a whole is based on inaccurate information. What do you do?
Which statement is NOT true about the configuration management system?
You are a PMP who is nearing the end of an important project. You have spent considerable energy on this project nurturing a cooperative relationship between your organization and the customer. What is the customer's MOST important role in bringing the project to a close?
All of the following statements are true about the cause and effect diagram EXCEPT?
You are the Project Manager for Commodities, Inc. You are involved in a new project to create an internal web site for the employees of Commodities, Inc that will allow them to view events within the company. All of the following options listed are project constraints EXCEPT?
The sponsor and the project manager are discussing what type of contract the project manager plans to use on the project. The buyer points out that the performing organization spent a lot of money hiring a design team to come up with the design. The project manager is interested in seeing that the risk for the buyer be as small as possible. An advantage of a fixed price contract for the buyer is:
You are a Project Manager and are nearing the end of your project. You are now required to provide lessons learned documentation on the project. What is the MAIN purpose for preparing lessons learned documentation?
Which strategy attempts to reduce the probability and/or the impact of a risk to the point where the risk can be accepted?
You are a Project Manager for Groceries R' US, a supermarket chain, and are currently working on a project to build a new outlet. The planned values (PV) for the foundation and the frame are $150,000 and $500,000. After five months, you do a performance measurement analysis. You are currently not ahead of schedule. The actual costs for the foundation and frame were $175,000 and $650,000 up to this point where 100% of the foundation is complete and only 80% of the frame is complete. Which value represents the cost performance index (CPI) to two decimal places at this point in the project?
Due to unforeseen circumstances your supplier has run out of the cement needed for your construction project. What is the BEST strategy for dealing with this issue?
You are a Project Manager for a company that has a composite organization structure. The current project you are managing is coming to an end. There are a number of activities that need to be completed including releasing project resources. All of the following statements are examples or true statements related to releasing project resources in this company EXCEPT?
You have been asked to determine the logical relationships, leads, and lags for the activities that make up a project. What would be the BEST technique to use?
You are holding a kick off meeting for the build out of a new data center. This will be the largest, most costly and most complex project you have worked on in your career. You have counted up the number of stakeholders, vendors and project team members to be 52. In order to stress to the group how important and difficult communication will be on the project you want to tell them how many channels of communication exist on the project. What would you tell them?
A communications management plan should include all of the following, EXCEPT:
You are working on a project with a fixed fee contract, therefore communications should tend toward?
A project initially starts out with 3 stakeholders but the number increases to 7 during the course of the project. How many channels does the project manager now need to manage?
You are the Project Manager and are responsible for the development of a mall. As with any construction project, there will be multiple iterations of blueprints and engineering drawings, so you have decided to create an online database that can be used to query the documents by name, type, date, etc. This is an example of what type of communication tool?
You are working on a project where all the team members are located in geographically different areas, therefore all the communication is done via e-mail and chat. It is sometimes hard to get the true meaning of these messages because you can't see facial expression or hear tone of voice, this is an example of?
You are reviewing a project with Tom, a new project manager. While discussing the communication requirements with Tom, you find that he has an impression that a project with 'n' number of stakeholders has 'n' communication channels. You are aware that this is wrong. What is the right answer?
Your project calls for communication with a very large audience. What communication method would be appropriate under such circumstances?
An external auditor is auditing the quality of your project's management processes. Which of the following processes this activity relates to?
Successful project managers generally spend an inordinate of time, doing what?
D Communication Channel formula is: n(n-1)/2. N=Number of people involved on the project. 52(52-1)/2 52*51=2652 2652/2=1326 [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 292] [Project Communications Management] 2. D The Risk Register is part of Risk Management and is not included in the Communications Management Plan. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 296] [Project Communications Management] 3. C Anytime contracts are involved in a project, the project manager/team should use formal written communication methods. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 287] [Project Communications Management] 4. C The correct answer is 21. The number of channels = n(n-1)/2 where n is the number of stakeholders. Since there are 7 stakeholders now, the number of channels is 7 X 6 / 2 = 21. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 292] [Project Communications Management] 5. A The online database is an example of a Project Management Information System. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 554] [Project Communications Management] 6. D Anything that interferes with the meaning of a message is considered noise. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 293] [Project Communications Management] 7. D The correct response is n(n-1)/2 where n = number of stakeholders. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 292] [Project Communications Management] 8. A The situation in the project would call for pull communication. This is suited for very large audiences and would allow them to access information content at their own discretion. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 295] [Project Communications Management] 9. B This is an example of a quality audit by an external auditor. This is a tool and technique of the Perform Quality Assurance process. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 247] [Project Quality Management] 10. B Most projects fail because of poor communication. Successful project managers spend a great deal of time communicating. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 287] [Project Communications Management] Exam 13 Test Questions 1. You have completed your estimates for your project and determined that it will take 10 months to complete. However, your project sponsor insists that it be completed in 9 months. How do you handle this?
Lois is a project manager managing a town-development project. She has set up a series of interviews with various stakeholders to gather some experiential and historical information on risks. Which phase is this likely to happen in?
Which of the following models describes stakeholders based on their power, urgency and legitimacy?
A project was awarded based on a competitive proposal. Management made a commitment that a few key team members would be made posted on the project. When such assignments happen, they are termed as:
Richard is currently assessing his project stakeholders influences, interests, expectations, risk tolerance and engagement levels. This relates to which of the following tools and techniques?
A project manager had scheduled a number of training programs for his team. However, he was aware that apart from planned training, unplanned training also took place in a number of ways. Which of these is not one of the ways in which unplanned training can happen?
As part of the procurement process, the procuring organization elected to have an estimate of costs prepared by an outside professional estimator. The estimator came up with an estimate of $ 500,000. However, the cost estimates prepared by prospective sellers were in the range of $ 200,000. How can this be best interpreted?
A project manager is working on the Perform Quality Assurance phase of a project. He is looking for an iterative means to improve quality and eliminate activities that don't add value. Which of the following will help him do this?
Mark is managing a water distribution network design project. The project is currently in the planning phase. During the Plan Stakeholder Management process, Mark feels the need to update the project stakeholder register. What should Mark do?
A project manager included contingency reserves and management reserves in the total budget of a high-risk project. He also made certain earned value measurement calculations. Which of the following is incorrect?
Linda is a first-time project manager and is analyzing a project schedule. She intends to apply resource leveling and has been given the following guidelines on resource leveling. Which of these four statements is incorrect?
Risk identification checklists are usually developed based on historical information and knowledge accumulated from previous similar projects. Which of the following statements about risk identification checklists is wrong?
Lena is managing the construction of a new office facility for her company. The project is half way through the execution. The project sponsor has asked Lena to ensure that all they key project stakeholders are still committed to the project. How can Lena assess the stakeholders' current engagement levels?
The list of identified risks is found in the risk register. However, the highlevel risks are first listed in the:
20% of the work was completed in a project. At this stage the project manager determined that the budget at completion (BAC) was no longer viable and developed a forecasted estimate at completion (EAC). What index can the project manager use to look at the calculated projection of cost performance that must be achieved on the remaining work
A project uses rounding of activity estimates data to the nearest $100, uses staff hours as the unit of measure for resources, and has a variance threshold of 10% deviation from the baseline plan. These would be typically documented in the:
You are two days late on reporting status for a project that you are managing. The status report indicates that the project is lagging behind schedule. During the current week, you are confident of making up some of the lost time. How should you report project status?
You are a business development manager at a mid sized automobile manufacturing company. Recently, you've been given a project to evaluate the possibility of manufacturing light duty trucks in a Southeastern Asian country. To develop a cost estimate, you visit the country with a team of experts to analyze local resources such as power, labor, and real estate. After the visit, you discuss the findings with an automobile manufacturing consultant. The consultant notes that the local laws and government bureaucracy typically means foreign investors spend more over a year obtaining all required permits. To avoid these delays, the consultant advises exchanging a small amount of company stock to the son of the country's president. In return for the stock, the president's son will personally handle and expedite the issuing of all permits required. What should you do?
A project manager who is a PMP discovered that there had been an error in the estimation of a project. A certain cost had been double calculated with the result that the budget, which had already been approved, was now in excess by a figure of $ 25,000. She is aware that publicizing this information will cause her to receive a poor performance appraisal since her company is very fastidious about such matters. What should she do?
Conformance to requirements and fitness for use are key concepts in quality management. Which of the following tools translates the customer requirements into technical requirements?
A project manager uses a Power / Interest grid to identify stakeholders in the project and to manage their expectations. Identify which of the following statements is wrong in the context of a Power / Interest grid.
You have just been hired by a waste management company to start a solid waste management program in an under-developed country. The project will be on a build-operate-transfer basis and have a duration of 2 years. At close of the project, the program will be run by local authorities. The project has been sponsored by the World Bank and has been awarded to a large international consortium. Your company has been subcontracted to do this project along with 2 more contractor companies. After the project scope was finalized, you developed a cost estimate of USD $5.5 million. The sponsor reviews your detailed costing sheets, and is concerned about the total cost figure. He tells you that the maximum allowable budget he can allocate for this project is USD $5 million. What should you do?
The total planned value (PV) for a project was $ 150,000. During the course of the project, the actual cost incurred turned out to be $ 275,000. What is the limit that the project manager usually imposes on the actual cost (AC)?
All team members have not yet been acquired for a project. However, the project manager went ahead with estimating activity durations, budgeting and other activities. What could likely happen to the activity durations?
The senior analyst on a project came up with Activity Duration Estimates as follows: Activity A: 10 days + a lag of 2 days; Activity B: 1 week + a lead of 3 days. The project manager who reviewed this, came up with some objections to these estimates. What would they most likely be?
A requesting organization for a project created a document that included the business need and the cost-benefit analysis. What would this document be termed as?
Mark is managing a telecom network deployment project. The buyer of the telecom network is an external entity. Recently, the customer has requested all the future project updates to be automatically posted to their information system. In order to implement this, the project team needs to customize their project management information system so that it can be integrated with the customer's information system. This is a new customer requirement that was not a part of the original project's scope. What should the project manager do?
Variance analysis refers to cost performance measurements used to assess the magnitude of variation in comparison to the original cost baseline. What is the trend on the percentage range of acceptable variances as the project progresses?
Many organizations treat contract administration as an administrative function separate from the project organization. Who carries out the function of contract administration in such organizations?
Colocation is also referred to as:
A project was randomly picked up for a quality audit and a number of issues and non-conformances were found by the external auditor. The project manager lodged a protest with the quality department that this was incorrect procedure and he should have been given notice since an external auditor was involved. What is your view?
You are reviewing the response to an RFP issued by your company for a project that will last a year and exceed USD $5 million. Three vendors have been short listed. The first, Nosteltec Inc. is a relatively new company in this industry. It has put together a team of industry experts having a great deal of industry experience and qualifications. The second company, Xen Contractor, has been in business for 20 years. You and your company have a long and positive history working with this vendor. The third company is SonoNet LLC. They have been in business for 10 years and have a reputation for their extensive expertise and delivery; they are also well known as for being one of the more expensive providers in the market. You have many relationships with Xen Contractor staff that have been established during prior procurement contracts with this company. As a result a project manager from Xen Contractor with whom you are friendly both personally and professionally, calls you for clarification on a point mentioned in the 2nd section of the RFP. What should you do?
During the procurement process, a contractual relationship gets established between a buyer and a seller. During the contract lifecycle, what is the correct sequence in which the following terminology is applied to a seller? Vendor, Selected source, and Bidder.
A number of ethical issues came up in a large project consisting of 55 team members. The project manager explained to the sponsor that this was a common problem in larger teams. Whose responsibility is it to ensure that all team members maintain professionalism and follow ethical behavior?
One of the stakeholders of a project initiated a change request which was then documented in the change control system. In general, who would be responsible for approving or rejecting the change request?
A critical project rollout was delayed because one of the stakeholders did not receive necessary communication on time. On further analysis, the project manager discovered that communication had been sent out to the wrong teams. This would have happened because:
Activity attributes extend the description of the activity by identifying various components associated with the activity. Typically how many attributes are associated with each activity?
Due to a tight project schedule, a project manager did not document lessons learned all through the project. However, at the end of the project, he finally documented the lessons learned. Your comment on this would be:
A project manager is preparing the WBS for a software project. The WBS includes all the product and project work but excludes the project management work. From the following choices, select a statement that correctly describes this situation.
As part of EVM, a project manager is calculating the to-complete performance index (TCPI) based on EAC. The data that he has is: the budget at completion for the project is $ 100,000. The earned value for the project is $ 25,000. The actual costs to date are 40,000 and the estimate at completion is $ 115,000. What is the TCPI that he will obtain?
How can changes be made to a project management plan once it has been baselined by the project manager?
The morale of the team members of a project is very low. The team members feel that they were not given opportunities to participate in the organizational team development activities due to over allocations to project tasks, and hence they missed opportunities to grow. Which of the following is a primary factor for this situation?
Given multiple alternatives, the group decision method that allows the largest block in a group to decide (even if more than 50% of the members of the group do not support the decision) is called:
During the Control Scope phase, analysis of the scope performance resulted in a change request to the scope baseline. This change request will be processed for review and disposition in the:
A project manager is informed that a limited number of resources are going to be available for his project. He creates a project schedule by adding buffers to the project to protect the target finish date. What type of schedule network analysis is he using?
You are an electrical engineer with extensive experience in managing transmission projects, but limited experience with electronic design projects. However, in a stretch assignment, you have been recently transferred to another department in your company that focuses on electronic design. Further, you have been asked to lead a very important project involving both transmission and electronic design. In preparation for a meeting with your manager to discuss this opportunity, you review the initial project design brief. There are a number of items within this document that are unclear to you because of your lack of background in design. When you arrive at your meeting, your manager asks if you will be leading the project. How do you respond?
A seller started out a project on the basis of a Time and Material contract. The initial contract amount based on the agreed-upon rates and effort was $ 100,000 over a 1 year period. However, when the project was completed, the total contract value turned out to be $ 350,000 over a 2 year period. What mechanism could the buyer have used to prevent this unlimited cost growth and schedule change?
Projects, portfolios and programs are different entities in an organization. Which of the following choices states a correct relationship between them?
The Risk Management plan will usually contain the definitions of risk probability and impact. Which of the following has the highest impact (negative) on a project?
You are the project manager of a project and are about to conduct a risk identification exercise in a few days' time. You would like to proactively remind the participants in the exercise of the various sources from which risk may arise in the project. What could you use to help you do this?
Ron is a project manager handling an Alternate water-supply project. During a project performance review, he notices the following: (i) Activity A, on the critical path, is delayed by 4 days. (ii) Activity B, not on the critical path, is delayed by 9 days. (iii) Activity C, on the critical path is delayed by 2 days (iv) Activity D, not on the critical path, is delayed by 5 days. In what sequence should Ron prioritize his efforts in addressing these delays?
Which of the following statements about products and projects is true?
Mary has recently finalized her project management plan and has also got it approved. She is managing a complex manufacturing process improvement project. The project stakeholders' continuous support and commitment is an absolute must for the success of the project. Which of the following are the most crucial stakeholder management processes at this stage?
An important aspect of project management is the handling of stakeholder expectations. Typically, at what level are the stakeholders with respect to the project manager.
Public recognition of good performance creates positive reinforcement for the team members. When is the best time for a project manager to recognize team members' performance?
The requirements elicitation team has obtained a large number of ideas during sessions to gather product and project requirements. Which of the following techniques is best suited to have these ideas sorted into groups for review and analysis?
One of the performance requirements of a Company Website development project is that the home page should load in 1 second. Such performance requirements are usually part of:
Anna has recently taken over a project as the project manager. The project is early in the executing phase. Although, the project scope statement was signed off by all key stakeholders, Anna finds out that some of the key stakeholders do not fully understand the project scope. Stakeholders' continuous support is very critical for the success of the project. What must Anna do?
You have just joined a new organization as a project manager. You have heard a number of rumors about the procurement manager having possible underhanded dealings with suppliers. However, you have not been given any proof that these rumors are true. Your project requires a large number of dump trucks. Company policy mandates that all purchases go through the procurement department, rather than being handled by departmental employees. The value of the dump truck purchase is USD $395,000 and the contract was awarded to a supplier regularly used by your company. Shortly after taking delivery of the dump trucks, you learn that the procurement manager is driving a new car. What should you do.
The project management team expects that during the course of the project, there could be delays in component delivery due to strikes, changes to the permitting processes or extensions of specific engineering durations. What analysis will help come up with contingency and response plans to mitigate these?
In the earned value management technique, the cost performance baseline is referred to as:
A seller entered into contract with a buyer. At the end of the project, the seller was reimbursed for the cost of the project, but received a very low fee based on certain subjective criteria that had been laid down in the contract. What type of contract is this likely to be?
You've just completed a solid waste management project in an underdeveloped country. The contractor you are working for has a strict policy of abiding by local laws and rules, although the local resources working on the project have a much more lax approach to following laws and policies. Now at the end of the project, you are handing over the operational equipment to the local operators and disposing of the leftover inventory and other furniture which was used during the project. More than 50% of the toxic materials used during the project remains in your inventory. There is no law that would prohibit you from disposing of either the type or quantity of remaining materials in the local sewage system. What should you do?
During a cost performance review with certain senior officers from the finance department, you discover that there are certain inconsistencies in the way cost performance reporting is done, and you obtain data that shows these officers are deliberately misleading senior management. What should you do?
Your company is planning to bid on a project in an application area in which you have never worked before. You are aware that your company does not have any resources with the necessary expertise. Your management is pressurizing you to submit a bid. What should you do?
Which of the following processes goes beyond the distribution of relevant information and seeks to ensure that the information being communicated to project stakeholders has been appropriately generated, as well as received and understood?
Eric, a project manager, is a certified PMP. He is responding to an RFP from a buyer and needs to fill in details on the financial performance of his company. His company has performed badly during the current quarter and the results will be published in 2 to 3 days' time. However, the company has done very well in the previous quarters. The RFP is due in 10 days' time and all the other information in the RFP is ready and filled out (except the financial information). What should Eric do?
You are managing a project with over 130 procurement contracts. Because of the number of contracts, your project team includes a procurement manager and a procurement assistant. Company policy requires that certain types of procurements be advertised to potential bidders by means of newspaper advertisements. The procurement assistant typically reviews the bids received and short lists the suppliers for further review by the procurement team. During a meeting to review and select a vendor from the short listed suppliers, you discover that one of the suppliers is a company owned by your cousin. Which of the following is the best course of action?
A buyer and seller are looking at getting into a long-term relationship spanning over 10 years. Both parties would like to be protected from the unstable financial conditions of the country that are beyond their control. What type of contract is appropriate for such a relationship?
Midway through the Collect Requirements process, a project manager finds that there are lots of unresolved issues. Which of the following is usually the best way to discover and resolve issues?
During a project update meeting, one of the key stakeholders expressed his displeasure over the recently produced deliverables. 1% of the produced deliverables had minor defects. This stakeholder has been a resisting stakeholder so far. What must the project manager do in order to bring the future project performance in line with the approved quality requirements?
A project manager would like to resolve conflicts with a give-and-take attitude rather than using a one-sided approach. Which of these approaches is he likely to use?
A number of deliverables were submitted to the buyer as part of a project. Where would the project manager find documentation on the requirements for formal deliverable acceptance and how non-conforming deliverables can be addressed?
Late in the project cycle, it was discovered that some of the project human resources needed to have been trained on a specific methodology. Ideally, where should these training needs have first been documented?
You are managing an electronic chip design project for a customer. There are a number of engineers and subject matter experts from the customer's organization that have been assigned as resources to the project, as well as several additional design engineers that have been supplied by your company. All the engineers have been involved in the development of a prototype chip; a very time consuming and expensive process. Upon the completion of the prototype, you submit it for review to ensure that there are no patent infringement issues with the design. When the results come back, it is determined that there are multiple issues that could result in an intellectual property dispute with the patent owners, should the prototype design be released commercially. The affected prototype elements were developed by resources from your company as well as your customer's organization. What should you do?
While managing a large project, the project manager decided to include indirect costs as part of his cost estimate. If indirect costs are included in an estimate which of the following is true?
A project manager analyzed the project's communication requirements and decided that 10 out of the 30 stakeholders in the project would only need voicemail updates of certain information. This type of communication method is called:
A project involved development of a high speed hard disk drive. As part of its testing, the hard disk was subjected to continuous operation at a high speed and an elevated temperature. At the end of the test, the hard disk was destroyed beyond use. The cost of such testing is usually classified as:
Identification of new risks, reassessment of old risks and closing of outdated risks are done as part of the Control Risks phase. How often should project risk reassessment be scheduled?
Which of the following is the process of communicating and working with stakeholders to meet their needs and expectations, address issues as they occur, and foster appropriate stakeholder engagement?
Rick has just been assigned as the project manager of a project to develop a complex product. The project is in the Define Scope phase. Which of these tools / techniques will not be used by Rick in this phase?
Teams go through various stages of development. As per the Tuckman ladder of development, the stage during which the least amount of work gets done is usually the:
A project manager has been asked to manage a research project. By its very nature, this type of project is not very clearly defined and involves a lot of uncertainty. What phase-to-phase relationship should the project manager use for this project?
A senior project manager advises a first-time project manager that identifying risks is just one step. On a continuous basis, new risks need to be identified, and existing risks need to be analyzed, tracked and their status reported. All this is done as part of what process?
A project manager has decided to use a decision tree to make a build or upgrade analysis. The build requires an investment of $ 200 M (where M represents million). On the build decision branch, there is a 60% probability of strong demand (yielding a revenue of $ 400 M) and a 40% probability of weak demand (yielding a revenue of $150 M). What is the expected monetary value (EMV) of the build?
A project management team came up with certain metrics such as defect frequency, failure rate, availability and reliability. These are usually defined as an output of what process?
In order to keep costs low, a project management team decided to apply statistical sampling while inspecting some of the work products. They decided to select 10 out of 50 engineering drawings for inspection. During which process should the sample frequency and sample size be determined?
A project manager prepared a presentation that included data on utilization of resources on her project, improvements in efficiency of the staff on the project, and the cost savings. She is doing this as part of what process?
A very critical resource is on another project team. It is very important you get his time for your project. You have contacted his team's manager multiple times, but have received a poor response. What should you consider doing next?
Which of these is a valid response to negative risks and not positive risks?
As the project manager, of a project to construct a city park, you have yourself identified 39 risks on the project, determined what would trigger the risks, rated them on a risk rating matrix, tested the assumptions and assessed the quality of the data used. You now plan to move to the next step of the risk management process. What have you missed?
Your project sponsor has asked you to present your project's high-level risk register to him in the next project update meeting. Which of the following processes must be started to have your high level risk register?
Which of these is an input of the Control Risks process?
If a project has a 60% chance of a U.S. $100,000 profit and a 40% chance of a U.S. $100,000 loss, the expected monetary value of the project is?
Which of these statements about Risk in a project is correct?
The Manage Communications process belongs to which of the following process groups?
Your company has been awarded a very large software project by a government agency. This project has an early completion incentive, and your company has a policy of paying a bonus to the project manager if such an incentive is awarded. However, this particular government agency has a reputation for being very difficult to work with; there is a great deal of bureaucracy within this agency and stonewalling and hostile behavior toward contractors is very common. The project manager will need to have excellent political skills to successfully lead this project. You have been asked to lead the project because of your expertise with this type of project. However, you have never worked within such a highly charged and political environment. What should you do?
As part of a strategy to handle negative risk, a project manager decided to adopt less complex processes, conduct more tests and choose a more stable supplier. What strategy would this be classified as?
Bill is the project manager of an external project for a customer. The project is expected to take about a year to complete. Six months into the project, the customer informs Bill that the project needs to be scrapped. During which of the following processes would procedures be developed to handle early termination of a project?
During a discussion with the quality department, a project manager was given to understand that both prevention and inspection meant the same as applied to projects. However, he had a different understanding of the terms. What would you comment on this situation?
Mark is managing an airport construction project. He is currently identifying his project stakeholders and he has already got a huge list of stakeholders. Managing expectations of each and every project stakeholder is not practical. What should be done in this situation?
While preparing a human resource plan, a project manager documented that one of the senior programmers in the team would make decisions on whether the quality of deliverables from the project met the project's documented standards. Which of the following aspects of a human resource plan does this address?
Prioritization matrices are an important quality planning tool. They provide a way of ranking a diverse set of problems and/or issues by order of importance. How is this list usually generated?
Sally, a project manager was reconciling expenditure of funds with funding limits on the commitment of funds for the project. She found a large variance between the funding limits and planned expenditures. As a result, she decided to reschedule work to level out the rate of expenditures. This is known as:
Jessica is managing an office refurbishment project. All of the project stakeholders have been identified and classified. The stakeholder management plan has also been approved. Jessica is managing a project for the first time in her life and she is relying on the PMBOK guide as a reference to deliver a great project. Which of the following processes would provide guidance to Jessica regarding how to execute the approved stakeholder management plan?
As part of stakeholder analysis, a project manager drew up a power / interest grid. The project manager identified that a stakeholder could be classified low on the "interest" scale, and also as low on the "power" scale. What strategy should be used for such a stakeholder?
Which of the following statements accurately describes how the completion of project scope and product scope is measured?
Bill and Jake are two team members in a project. They do not get on well, and are constantly involved in verbal fights. The project manager steps in to resolve the situation. As an experienced project manager, he understands the characteristics of conflict and the conflict management process. Which of the following is not a characteristic of conflict?
William is managing a high priority project for his organization. The project has recently lost the support of the key stakeholders. Despite a number of efforts, William has failed to realign the stakeholders and regain their support. What should he do now?
A project manager manages a distributed team with team members located in five countries. Due to time-zone differences, he is unable to find a time that is acceptable to all team members. Which conflict resolution technique is best suited for this situation?
A buyer and seller fixed up the rates for junior engineers, senior engineers, architects, and other predefined roles. In what type of a contract would this be applicable?
A project manager is estimating project costs and needs to decide whether the estimates will include only direct costs, or whether the estimates will also include indirect costs. In which of the following phases does this decision need to take place?
After conducting a bidder conference, you receive an email from one of the bidders requesting additional information. The information was neither included in your Request for proposal, nor asked by any one during the bidder conference. You realize that answer to this question is critical to understanding the scope of the project. If not communicated to bidders, they will not be able to accurately size their teams and estimate the total duration of the project, and may also have a large impact on cost. However, the answer contains some proprietary information that, if disclosed to a competitor, may reveal the future product strategy of your company. Such a disclosure could be disastrous for a major product launch you are planning in the next year. So you decide to send the answer to all of the bidders, but realize that one of the bidders is also working closely with one of your competitors on a similar project. What should you do?
During a project status meeting, a project manager presented sensitive information related to the project. However, this information was not intended to be available to the audience. Which of the following processes was incorrectly done resulting in the project manager communicating sensitive information to the wrong audience?
A project manager drew up a resource histogram. On plotting the histogram, he found that some bars extended beyond the maximum available hours. What does this usually signify?
A project manager is planning out the availability of resources as part of the Acquire Project Team process. He needs to acquire resources that report to a functional manager. What technique will he likely use to obtain these resources?
You are just about to present your project's status to your company's executive team. One of your resources hands you an updated report on the progress of a critical deliverable as you are leaving your desk for the meeting. You review the report as you are walking to the conference room and notice that there is an error in the report. What do you do?
Sheila has been assigned as the project manager of a project. After a detailed discussion with the project management team, she decides to come up with a quality management plan that is informal and broadly framed. What would your comment on this be?
A project manager was involved in preparation of the project charter for an external project. One of the inputs to the project charter was a statement of work (SOW). The SOW may have been received from the customer as part of all of the following except:
A project manager is determining dependencies that will require a lead or a lag to accurately define the logical relationship. Which of the following correctly describes leads or lags?
A project manager is updating her project team over the new project management approach selected for the project. This new approach is the industry best practice. The project manager is also discussing the potential stakeholder impact of trying the new approach. The key stakeholders support and involvement is very crucial for the success of the project. If the key stakeholders don't buy-in the idea of trying the new approach, the new approach will have to be dropped. What must the project manager do in order to reduce the probability of this risk?
A project manager estimated that a project would require 4375 person hours of effort. The project ended up using 6250 person hours of effort. The difference between these two figures is called a:
Projects can deliver products that vary in quality and grade. Which of the following people is responsible for managing the tradeoffs involved to deliver the required level of quality and grade?
The scope of work in a project could not be clearly defined. There was also a strong possibility that the scope would be altered during the course of the project. Which type of contract would suit this type of situation?
You are managing a project with a large multi-national staff. One of the engineers was originally tasked to deliver her part of the work on Oct 19, but due to the change in the critical path, her deliverable will be needed 2 days sooner. However, as the new deadline is still 2 weeks away and she is ahead of schedule, you are confident that her delivery will be on time. During a staff meeting, you learn from her functional manager that this engineer celebrates a religious holiday on Oct 17. He tells you that the engineer is not particularly religious, however, and if pushed a bit and offered some incentive she may forego celebrating this holiday and come to work. What should you do?
Jackie is the project manager of large project. During the Determine Budget process, she identifies that contingency reserves need to be made for unplanned but potentially required changes that could result from realized risks identified in the risk register. Which of the following is true about reserves?
The legal nature of the contractual relationship between a buyer and a seller requires that appropriate legal counsel be involved in the project, for specific activities. Which of the following phases requires legal counsel to be involved.
A project manager is looking at a make-or-buy analysis as part of the Plan Procurement Management process. What type of costs should the project manager consider for this analysis?
During the execution of a project, a large number of defects were discovered. The project manager ensured that the issues, defect resolution and action item results were logged into a defects database. What would the defect database be considered a part of?
A project manager is currently ensuring that the stakeholders clearly understand the project goals, objectives, benefits and risks. This relates to which of the following processes?
Which of the following may not be considered an attribute of a project?
Which of the following structures is helpful in tracking project costs and can be aligned with the organization's accounting system?
A first-time project manager is advised by an experienced project manager that he needs to plan for cost of quality. The first-time project manager is not sure of what costs are included in the cost of quality. What would your advise be?
Miranda is an experienced project manager. As part of the Collect Requirements phase, she decides to use a group creativity technique. This technique is expected to enhance brainstorming with a voting process, and can be used to rank the most useful ideas for further brainstorming or prioritization. Which of the following will she likely use?
A group of people were discussing multiple alternatives during the Collect Requirements process. One of the individuals in the group made the decision for the group. This method of reaching a group decision would be termed as:
All of the monitoring and control processes and many of the executing processes produce change requests as an output. Change requests include corrective action and preventive action. Which of the following are normally affected by corrective and preventive actions?
You are a certified PMP, and have been contact by PMI as part of an investigation they are conducting into allegations of improper conduct by your manager, also a PMP. A complaint has been filed stating that your manager has received bribes related to a large procurement contract on another project. PMI has asked if you would be able to provide information regarding this situation. What should you do?
As part of the Estimate Costs process, a project manager obtained access to certain commercially available databases to get resource cost rate information. What type of input is such published commercial information considered as?
A project needed to monitor the technical performance of the project and capture data related to how many errors or defects had been identified, and how many remained uncorrected. Which of the following techniques should the project use?
Nancy's project has got a huge number of key positive and negative stakeholders. It is very important to closely manage the influential negative stakeholders to ensure project's success. Do the key positive stakeholders need to be managed as well?
A project charter that formally authorized a project was created. The project charter documented the initial requirements to satisfy stakeholders' needs and expectations. How often should the project charter ideally be revised?
Kelly, the project manager of a large project, found that she did not have the necessary number of resources required for some activities in the project. To account for the limited resources, she decided to apply the critical chain method. Which of the following would she use to protect the critical chain from slippage along the feeding chains?
A statement of work (SOW) is a narrative description of the products or services to be delivered by the project. It usually references all of the following except:
Nancy's project is in execution. Nancy is currently planning to execute the Manage Stakeholder Engagement process. She has gathered the stakeholder management plan, the recent change log, and the necessary organizational process assets. Which of the following is a key input to this process that is still missing from this list?
A project manager needed to shorten a project schedule. He decided to apply crashing, a schedule compression technique. Which of the following activities would not be an example of crashing?
A research project needed to be carried out under largely undefined, uncertain and rapidly changing environmental conditions. If this project is carried out as a multi-phase project, which of the following phase-to-phase relationships best suits it?
Stanley's project is in execution. Stanley has a monthly stakeholder update meeting set up where he presents the project's progress and current issues to the key stakeholders. During the last stakeholder update meeting, the stakeholders requested Stanley to provide bi-weekly project updates instead of monthly updates. The communication management plan has been broadly framed and it doesn't restrict Stanley from doing bi-weekly updates. What should Stanley do?
Decision tree analysis is used to calculate the average outcome when the future includes scenarios that may or may not happen. What is the input and output in a decision node?
Sensitivity analysis helps to determine which risks have the most potential impact on the project. A project manager prepared a display chart of sensitivity analysis for his project. The diagram contained a series of bars with the length of the bars corresponding to the risk impact on the project. The longer the bars, the greater was the risk presented. Such a diagram is likely to be:
As part of the Plan Risk Management process, a project manager is looking at the activity of preparing a risk management plan. Which of the following is true about risks?
You have just taken over a project from another project manager about 6 months into a 12-month project. As you get to know the staff on the project, you become aware that 5 staff members are relatives of the previous project manager. What do you do?
A seller organization was executing work for a project under a contract. During the course of the project, a number of disputes arose over the scope and quality of work. Which of the following is the preferred method of resolving these claims?
You are the project manager of a project executing work under a contract signed with a buyer organization. Just after the project has started, you notice that the buyer organization had made a mistake in the financial terms and your organization stands to benefit considerably through this oversight. What should your stance be?
You are managing a project to design microprocessor control systems. The design work was estimated to complete in 3.5 months, with seven milestones. The sixth milestone is the prototype to be handed over to manufacturing. All milestones before prototyping have been completed ahead of schedule with 6th one being delayed for 4 months as the prototype has been sent back several times, due to conflicts between departments. You are now planning to hold a meeting to review the design specifications, and handle conflicts between design and manufacturing. Who is at fault?
Sheila is a project manager managing a global project. She has stakeholders located in various parts of the globe. Due to the nature of the project, she also has large volumes of information that needs to be shared with the recipients. What type of communication method should she prefer for this purpose?
Dan is a project manager in an organization and conducts a workshop on project management. Which of the following statements made by him about projects is incorrect?
A project team is currently planning to perform the Control Stakeholder Engagement process to reassess the project stakeholders' current engagement levels and review the current stakeholder management strategy. Which of the following is an output of this process?
Variance Analysis is an important tool used in the Control Costs Process. Which of the following statements regarding variances is correct?
As part of risk planning, some responses are designed for use only if certain events occur. A project manager of a multi-year project decided to trigger one such set of responses during the Control Risks process. Which of the following is likely to have triggered the responses?
Stakeholder analysis is an important technique in the Identify Stakeholders process. One of the steps involved is to identify the potential impact of each stakeholder and classify them appropriately. Which of the following is not a valid model used for this purpose?
A key project in an organization has been ignored due to high travel expenses associated with the movement of subject matter experts and other specialists across various project locations. Which of the following will permit such a project to be taken up in a cost-efficient manner?
Your company took over the management of a project from another company that went out of business. To minimize disruptions related to the transition, your company hired a number of the employees from the other company. One of these employees has delivered a 300 page document a week ahead of schedule. However, while walking past his desk you notice he has a document opened on his computer with the logo of his former employer. You suspect that some of his work may have been taken from documentation that is the property of the other company. What do you do?
A project manager is confused about the perspective of the buyer-seller relationship in the context of project procurement management. How would your clarify this?
It was found that there were a large number of hidden requirements to be uncovered in the Collect Requirements phase. Which of the following tools should a project manager use to identify them?
A project manager in a seller organization discovered that certain deliverables had been handed over to the buyer without undergoing proper testing. Recalling the deliverables will result in a cost overrun to the project. What should the project manager do in such a case?
Matt is the project manager of a project that involves a buyer-seller relationship. The source selection criteria is an input to which of the following processes?
A project manager is estimating the project duration and finds that the only information available to him is a previous project that was quite different from the current one. However, some portions of the previous project were similar to the current one. Which of the following tools is the project manager likely to use?
During the Conduct Procurements process, the procuring organization found that there were significant differences in the pricing by different sellers. What is the best course of action in such a scenario?
A first-time project manager was of the opinion that all training activities need to be planned. He discussed this with an experienced project manager, and understood that some training was necessarily unplanned. Which of the following correctly lists examples of unplanned training?
A project manager used a control chart to determine whether a process was stable or not, and to determine if its performance was predictable. He determined the upper and lower specification limits based on the contractual requirements. A set of eighteen data points were taken. Of these, 8 consecutive data points were above the mean. What can you say about such a process?
While analyzing the risks in a project, a project manager came up with a Risk Urgency Assessment document. In which process would this be done?
A project manager is looking at various classification methods to share information among project stakeholders. Which of the following correctly classifies the different methods used?
Which of the following roles in a project is more likely to be involved in negotiations on procurements during the Conduct Procurements phase?
You have received a proposal against a RFP that was sent to vendors. One of the vendors has indicated that they can do the project for $12,500. The cost for the project is $10,000 and their profit will be $2,500. Which type of the contracts is most suitable to be used in this situation?
Your company requires that before you purchase any routers or switches for the data center you are building, you need to solicit quotes from three separate suppliers prior to submitting the purchase request to the finance department. This policy belongs to?
Which process involves verification and acceptance of all project deliverables, and hence supports the Close Project or Phase process?
Which of the following is accurate regarding agreements in the Project Procurement Management?
The types of contracts that can be used in a project are documented in the:
You are building a mansion that will have copper roofs. The duration of the project will be approximately three years, so you have built into the contract that as the price of copper increases the contract allows for price increases as a percentage of the cost copper. However, all other costs are fixed. This is an example of what type of contract?
Your are working for a large project organization, with several project managers, working on 15 projects. All project managers submit their status reports at month end. One of your colleague project manager has reported an error in last 2 months. Discussing the issue with one of her project's team members, who is also working on one of your projects, you realize that she is deliberately misreporting the project's status, to pump-up her performance as the annual performance appraisal is due next month. The month-end review meeting will be held in 2 days time as you are preparing your presentation for the same. What should you say about her status report?
Experienced project managers always tell that accuracy and precision are not the same. Precise measurements may not be accurate and accurate measurements may not be precise. Which of the following statements about the precision and accuracy are CORRECT?
You are in the middle of a risk assessment meeting with key stakeholders, customers and project team leaders. While identifying and assessing risks, you have realized that two key stakeholders are overemphasizing the impact of a risk. What is the BEST step you must take to avoid unfairness or bias when assessing risks?
Which of the following is the best strategy for managing project stakeholders who have high interests in the project but do not have significant powers?
There is a heavy demand for new houses in your city's expensive neighborhood. RECON, a construction company employed you as a project manager to assess the benefit of building new energy efficient houses in that neighborhood although it takes more expensive technology to build such houses. You have started gathering data to perform the detail payback analysis to submit a report to the management. Since the full financial impact of energy efficient house building is difficult to estimate, you would like to prepare a rough cost-benefit analysis and include it with the report. Which of the following describes the effort you are undertaking in this scenario?
Jared is in the execution phase of a residential housing construction project. He has been informed of major scope changes from stakeholders in the middle of the project. These changes involve regulatory requirements from local authorities that may impact not only the scope but also the cost and duration of the project. What should be the FIRST approach from Jared in considering these changes?
You are working in an Information Technology project as a project manager to develop a shopping website for your customers. Some key stakeholders in the project suggested scope changes to improve the look and feel of the website. Your team has analyzed the impact of these changes and presented to the change control board for approval. What should be your next step if the change control board accepts all proposed changes?
Jane is worried about her project because many of her tasks are slowly moving and two critical tasks may have the chance of slippage. She conducts a thorough resource analysis and finds out that there are five resources who will be free next week. She would like to use this as an opportunity to assign those resources to finish her tasks early and prevent the project completion date from slipping. This is an example of?
You are working on a waste management project that, upon competition, will be handed over to the local municipality for steady state operation. Parking of the trucks and other vehicles has become a major problem because no parking area has been allotted to you on the main dumping site. As a result, your trucks are being parked on nearby roadsides. One of the fleet supervisor tells you that there is a large tract of land very close to the main site, that is owned by a local charity. Many locals park their cars on this tract of land. What should you do?
In a textile manufacturing project, a team divided the whole project work into 35 work packages and assigned a few work packages to the design department for review. After the review, the manager of the design department requested the team to further divide the work packages into more manageable work components for estimating and scheduling the resources. In this scenario, which of the following techniques should the team use to complete the manager's request?
You are working as a project manager for MALTEX, an IT organization having a projectized organization structure. You have recently started managing a project that involves stakeholders from within and outside your organization. The stakeholders external to your organization are very critical as their interests are negatively affected by the project. You are making serious efforts to gather their expectations and influence levels early in the project to make sure that their voice is heard and proper communication needs can be planned in the future phases of the project. The outcome of your effort can be documented in:
You have been managing a Federal highway construction project which is intended to improve the transportation between north and south regions of a country. Being in the execution phase, the change control board has approved many change requests generated from stakeholders including the highway transportation agency. At least half of those requests were made to bring the quality of the micro texture of the road aligned with the quality levels incorporated in the project management plan. What is the next course of action for you going forward?
During a key stakeholders update meeting, George's project was challenged. The project is currently in the executing phase. One of the key stakeholders challenged that the project no longer makes any business sense to her. What must George do next?
To communicate with stakeholders on the resolved issues and the issues that are hard to resolve, you use an issue log in your project. Since you assign an owner for every issue and resolve it by proactively working on it, your stakeholders actively support all your efforts in managing the project. This method of actively resolving issues and reducing risks to the project is known as:
You have been assigned as the project manager for a software development project. You are currently communicating with stakeholders and addressing their issues and expectations. Which of the following documents help carrying out this effort?
Changes in the projects are inevitable. So, project managers must develop or use a system to manage and control changes. There are four types of changes that need to be controlled in a project. Project changes, deliverable changes, process changes, and baseline changes. The impact of each of these changes must be evaluated and approved or rejected changes must be communicated to all stakeholders as and when required. Which of the following helps controlling the above mentioned changes?
Two of your expert team members have been in a heated argument over the use of a new software product for your research project. Recently you noticed that the argument instead of increasing creativity, is causing conflict between the team members. To prevent the conflict from escalating, you want to resolve it by evaluating alternatives and open dialogue. All of the following statements about a conflict are false EXCEPT:
While going through a list of candidates to be hired for your project, you find that your cousin is one the 3 short listed candidates. You know that she was desperately looking for job. After reviewing these resumes, you'll be sending them to the electronics engineer for a technical interview. Having a first look at the 3 short listed resumes, you realize that they have similar qualifications and experiences. What should you do?
Which of the following is neither an input to nor an output of the Close Procurements process?
Some tools or techniques can be used across different project processes to plan, execute or control the characteristics of project elements. Which of the following is used as a tool in both Control Quality and Plan Quality Management processes?
In an underground highway construction project, the project stakeholders have suggested many changes to the project scope. As you have already defined the cost baseline in your project, you would like to revisit the baseline to see how these changes impact the overall cost of the project. So, you have started an impact analysis to determine the impact, and inform the concerned stakeholders of all approved changes and the corresponding costs. You must use the following to carry out such process:
You have recently joined the a new company as a project manager. While reviewing the procurement plans for a project you will be taking over, you see that the company is considering using one of the most expensive manufacturers to provide certain equipment required for the project. While working with your previous employer, you used a different supplier for the same equipment, and paid significantly less for the equipment. Without telling your boss, you call the supplier you worked with previously for a quote. Have you violated the rule of keeping the proprietary information confidential?
Which of the following statements are NOT true considering the planned value, the earned value, the schedule variance and the cost variance of a project?
You are working as a project manager for a wind-powered vehicle manufacturing project, which is in its planning phase. You carefully gathered all your requirements from your key stakeholders and prepared a system requirements specification and project requirements specification documents. While presenting your documents to the project team, a project team member who is very enthusiastic about the project started talking about the duration estimates for each activity. Which of the following statements indicate your response to your team member?
Rosanne is an experienced project manager working on a pharmaceutical project. This project involves two big vendors to supply chemical products with specific composition for preparing drugs. While reviewing documents to see how the seller is performing, she noticed that some of the contractual terms were not met by the sellers. Since it is first time violation, she would like to initiate a corrective action to bring the performance of the seller consistent with the statement of work. Which of the following are NOT outputs of Rosanne's effort?
The project charter defines the overall scope and objectives of a project. Considering different inputs to the project charter, which of the following is NOT a correct statement?
Nancy's project is 80% complete. Which of the following is least likely to be updated to the organizational process assets during the Control Stakeholder Engagement process performed at this stage?
Close Project or Phase is the process of completing and concluding all activities across all process groups to officially close the project. Which of the following activities are NOT performed during this process?
Which of the following activities fall under the planning process group but not under the project time management?
James has been managing a hotel construction project in a busy street. He is in the process of estimating activity durations for building walls and calculates the most likely estimate as 15 days. If pre-fabricated material is used, it would take no more than 12 days to finish the work. However, the work may be delayed and could take up to 18 days if less experienced construction workers are used to build the walls. But, the engineer incharge of the work estimates the duration as 8 days when pre-fabricated material is used. What is the expected duration of building walls using the three-point (PERT) estimate, if the engineer's estimation is assumed correct?
Rodney is in the process of preparing the project performance report for the team meeting. He is expecting many questions from his stakeholders on the budget and schedule. He calculates the following values; Budget at Completion (BAC) = $22,000, Earned Value (EV) = $13,000, Planned Value (PV) = $ 14,000, Actual cost (AC) = $15,000. What is the Estimate at Completion (EAC) for the project if the work is performed at the budgeted rate?
You are reviewing the responses to an RFP issued by your company and realize that a major requirement was not included in the RFP that was released. By chance, however, one of the bidders included that requirement in their response. What is the best course of action?
Many organizations favor fixed-price contracts because the performance of the project is the responsibility of the seller. Which of the following very important for a firm fixed price contract?
Decision making is an important skill a project manager must possess to manage and lead the team. Which of the following is NOT a part of the sixphase decision-making model?
You applied for a project coordinator position in your organization. You have recently met with your director to learn more about the job functions of that position. Your director indicates that it is the functional managers who control the resources and not you in your new position. Which of the following represents the organization structure that you will be working in if you are chosen as a project coordinator?
Control charts are used to determine the stability of any process. Which of the following best describes the range of the control limits applied on a control chart?
Chris works as a project manager for UNISTEEL, a steel melting shop. He was assigned by his Executive Project Manager to study and prepare a report on the defects that eroded the blast furnace lining which has caused a drastic decline in production. Since this report will be used by the management to control the process and material quality, Chris performed a careful study and identified two major factors out of many factors related to refractories that caused majority of the lining problems. Which of the following statements BEST illustrate the technique Chris must have used in this scenario?
Cindy has been working in a manufacturing project as a project manager. This project is designed to produce high quality semiconductors to use in computers. Since semiconductors are produced from silicon wafers, she contracted a company to provide silicon wafers to the project on an ongoing basis. Due to unknown reasons from the contractor, low quality wafers have been transferred to the project compromising the electrical performance of semiconductors. Overwhelmed by the complaints from the computer division, Cindy is obligated to correct the manufacturing defects to avoid future liabilities. In this scenario, the costs incurred by Cindy is known as:
You, as an independent consultant, are working with a project manager of a spacecraft parts manufacturing project to make sure that the team comply with organizational quality policies and procedures. Since parts made in this project must adhere to high precision and accuracy, you are documenting the gaps within the processes and procedures to improve the quality for customer acceptance. Which of the following best represents the project management activity you are doing?
You have been managing a research project that is intended to create Genetically Modified fruits using Genetic Engineering techniques. Since many legal issues are involved in this process, you created contingency allowances by using different quantitative analysis methods to account for cost uncertainty. You have just wrapped-up a brainstorming session with your team in the execution phase to monitor new risks evolved in the project over past few weeks and to establish new risk response plans. What should you do if you want to allocate more contingency reserves to account for new risks?
In a small office construction project, the following activities are scheduled in sequence. i) Digging and pouring footings 5 days ii) Working on the slab and pouring 3 days iii) Framing the floor 5 days iv) Wall framing 4 days v) Roof framing 6 days vi) Insulation and drywall 7 days vii) Interior doors and trim 3 days viii) Hardware and fixtures 2 days. What is the minimum time to complete the project if all activities are on a critical path except number viii, and activity iii is delayed by 1 day?
Analyzing the situation, differentiating between wants and needs, and focusing on interests and issues rather than on positions are critical elements in:
In a ship design project, a project manager is in the process of negotiating with a consulting company to ensure that project receives certified and specialized consultants for creating the hull design. The project manager wants to make certain that the consultants will be able to work until their assignments are completed. He is using all his negotiation skills and interpersonal skills to get competent staff on time. Based on the scenario described above, the project manager is engaged in:
You have recently acquired a project to develop Organic products for a retail store. You are making informal conversations and luncheon meetings with all your senior functional managers to understand various factors that impact the allocation of resources to the project. Which of the following BEST describes the activity you are undertaking?
The organization's safety and health policy, ethics policy, project policy, and quality policy can be used in a project to influence it's success. All these policies are a part of:
Velvet is working for a chemical industry and her management proposed two different projects to manufacture Benzene for commercial use. After doing financial analysis, the financial advisor provided her the following statistics about the projects. Project-1-60% probability of success with a profit of $500,000 and 20% probability of failure with a loss of $200,000; Project-2-30% probability of success with a profit of $300,000 and 30% probability of failure with a loss of $400,000; Based on the information above, Velvet must choose:
You are managing a highly complex drug manufacturing project and your sponsor is highly motivated and influential. You are optimistic about the outcome of the project, however, you are not sure about the project approval requirements that measure the success of the project. So, you would like to document the name of the person who signs off on the project, and the criteria that constitutes the success of the project. Which of the following documents should you use first to incorporate project approval requirements?
To assist with the selection of a supplier for a large procurement on your project, you've hired a consultant. The consultant has prepared an independent estimate to be used as a benchmark while reviewing bids on the RFP. The independent estimate is confidential and is not shared with any bidders. When the sealed bids are opened, you discover that only 1 supplier, has submitted a quote lower than the independent estimate. All other quotes are 45% to 70% higher than the benchmark. While discussing this development with members of the project team, you learn that the company with the lowest bids is owned by a distant relative of the consultant you hired to create the benchmark. What is the best course of action?
A project to construct a high-rise building is progressing very well. Stakeholders are proactive in identifying issues related to the quality of the structure, walls and floors. As a project manager, you are conducting meetings to clarify or resolve their issues. Although, you are committed to manage stakeholders concerns, you learned that some critical issues need to be deferred to the next phase of the project for resolution. What should you do in this situation?
Marvin has been working for a retail company as a project manager. With his positive thinking and good managerial skills he turned many potentially disastrous projects into successes. Because of his expertise, the company high level executives offered him a group project manager position for a newly started environmental project. However, Marvin learned that in his newly assigned project he may have to offer bribes to get the Government licenses. What should Marvin do in such a situation?
Julia is managing a complex industrial process reengineering project. She has identified all of her key project stakeholders and has conducted individual interviews with them to identify other project stakeholders as well. However, Julia is still not comfortable with her project's stakeholders list as she believes there would be more key external stakeholders still missing from the list. What can help Julia in this situation?
You are in the final phase of a low cost car manufacturing project. This project, as designed, has delivered a low cost car that runs on the battery. However, to close this project, many administrative standards are required to be followed in order to avoid auditing from Government authorities. Since your organization possesses experts who have tremendous knowledge in closing procedures and standards, you would like to use them to close this project. This effort is an instance of:
Nancy is engaged in the construction of three unique office buildings. Although construction sites are located in various places, she has been managing each team very efficiently to complete the work on time and within the budget. Which of the following statements describe the effort that Nancy is doing?
There are several communication methods used to share and distribute information to stakeholders, team members and management. Which of the following communication methods are used during execution phase to notify the public about environmental changes your project is going to cause after implementation?
Lesley is managing a software development project for the World Climate Control Organization. Since her team members are dispersed across the globe, she would like to set up online conferences in next two months to let everyone in her project know what is going on and what their role is within the project. She wants to use these conferences as team development activities to learn and exchange information in the project. To schedule such activities, which of the following should she use to know the availability of team members?
Bill is managing a healthcare software development project using state-ofthe-art technology. Stakeholder management is very crucial for the success of this project. The stakeholder involvement and influence is significant on this project. During which of following project stages, stakeholder management will be the most challenging task for Bill?
Which of the following statements is NOT true considering the management of risks in a project?
You have been chosen by a program management office (PMO) to write a purchase order for your expertise in business writing. You have learned that the PMO has already selected a seller for a software product and would like to award the procurement contract to the selected seller as a purchase order which you must prepare. In this scenario, the PMO is administering:
Randy, a senior project manager, is using a lessons learned knowledge management system to document the findings in a precision instrument manufacturing project. He is using the information from his team which has identified causes of product quality variance using a control chart and the details regarding corrective actions chosen to reduce the variance and improve the product quality. Which of the following should Randy use to add this information to the lessons learned?
Shawn is in the execution phase of his project. He is getting unexpected requests from his stakeholders about the project progress. All of the following can be used by Shawn to respond to their requests EXCEPT:
Tom is managing a software development project. The buyer of the product is an external entity. During the execution of the project, Tom finds out that a new operations manager has been hired in the customer organization. The new manager is now a key stakeholder of the project. Which of the following documents is least likely to get updated as a result of the addition of this new stakeholder?
A drug manufacturing project requires many pharmaceutical chemicals for synthesizing to produce an active ingredient or a drug. You are managing a contractor to supply all these chemicals in your drug manufacturing project. Recent quality testing of the drugs raised concerns over the quality of the materials supplied by the contractor. Which of the following must be done to make sure that all contractual obligations are followed by the contractor?
A project manager is spending majority of the project funding in the current phase of the project. Not only she is spending her money but also managing various resources in the project. What is the stakeholder influence on the project now compared to earlier phases?
You are working for FALCON highway construction agency as a project cost estimator. The agency started a highway construction project which is in it's planning phase. The rough order of magnitude (ROM) cost estimate for the project is expected to be between 3 and 5 million dollars in the planning phase with a ROM of -25% to +25%. What will be the ROM estimate in the execution phase if it changes to -10% to +10%?
Organizations evaluate the need of buying products versus making the items themselves. Which of the following is not a factor that influences the make-or-buy decisions:
You are in the 10th month of a year long project and about to deliver the major product of your project. You have already received 75% of the total payment from the client. Your client is a non-governmental organization (NGO). You have just received a fax from the client saying that they are wrapping-up their operations from the region because of a change in the government. The new government has decided to close down this NGO because of fraud allegations. You are shocked to receive this news and call your boss to get a confirmation from him. He has also received the same news from other sources and asks you to terminate the project and release the team. What must you do?
Nancy can bid on two projects. 'Project A' has a 50% return on investment, while the 'Project B' has 20% return on investment. The Project A's scope of work is complex and Nancy's organizations doesn't have the necessary skills and experience to perform this project. However, Project B's scope of work falls within the strengths of Nancy's organizations. Which project must Nancy bid on?
Debbie, an IT project manager, is in the planning phase of a shopping website development project. A junior project manager, who has been working under her authority, started developing procedures to indicate how the integrity of cost and schedule performance baselines should be maintained in the project. Where should the junior project manager store these procedures?
Your organization has recognized a need to replace the legacy manufacturing system with a modern software application to reduce delivery delays and process downtime. Your IT director anticipates a project to fulfill this business need, however, he warns that the new project's budget cannot exceed $75,000 due to shortages in the department budget. He also indicates that no additional staff will be allocated to this project other than the existing IT staff. If you are assigned as a project manager to this project, you would document these initial project conditions as:
You have just received notice that the organization you've been working for as a project manager has gone bankrupt. All employees have been given 72 hours notice of termination. What is the best course of action for the two projects you are managing?
Jen works as a project manager for the National weather agency. She has been managing a project which was designed to find the impact of climate changes on Northern mountains. The initial study established two months delay for the testing equipment to reach mountains due to road construction. However, a recent assessment has shown a significant drop in the delay time because of rapid progress in construction. Which of the following steps should Jen take next to account for the change in the delay time?
The method used in the plan quality management process to identify the factors that may influence specific variables of a product under development is known as:
Dana works for a Federal agency that manages mission critical projects. As a project manager, she is responsible for all communication needs in her data center project, which has started recently. This project involves many stakeholders, customers, external vendors and team members. Since conflicts are inevitable in such a huge project, she has decided to provide her project team the details of the issue escalation process including the names of the chain of command to escalate the issues that cannot be resolved at a lower level. Dana must use the following document to store this information:
Bill is managing a website development project. He has recently received a feedback from one of the key project stakeholders. The feedback is overall positive but it contains some recommendations. After analyzing the recommendations, Bill accepts them, gets them approved and incorporates them into the project management plan. What needs to be done with this feedback now?
The project you are working on has received an invoice from a vendor for USD $17,500. However, your team believes the correct total due is $15,300. When you notify the vendor of this, the vendor still insists on US$ 17,500. What is the best course of action now?
Project costs are estimated for all project activities and aggregated to establish a cost baseline. Which of the following statements about the cost baseline is NOT true?
The RACI chart is an example for a responsibility assignment matrix (RAM). The letters R and C in RACI chart stand for
The number of communication channels depends on the number of team members in any project. If five team members are released from a team of 25, how many communication channels remain in the project?
You are managing a project for a customer that has just gone bankrupt and is subject to liquidation proceedings. There are several outstanding invoices that this customer has not paid to your company. What should you do now?
You are in a meeting with your senior manager who has been helping you to organize and manage a team of IT people with numerous backgrounds. While you are discussing the creativity and breakthrough performance your team is demonstrating now, your senior manager indicates that your team has moved from the storming to the performing stage. Which of the following explains the characteristic of the performing stage?
No matter how good you are in communicating, information distribution to stakeholders as planned is a challenging task. Many tools and techniques are used during the Manage Communications process EXCEPT:
Mary is a project manager for an infrastructure upgrade project in a Government agency. She has recently realized that a critical scheduled task exceeded the deadline and the stakeholders are on top it. The resource manager has permitted to use three more resources to work and complete the delayed task. Although, the attempt from the resource manager helps her, Mary is concerned about the task because:
All of the following are tools of the Control Schedule process EXCEPT:
You are working with your customers on completed deliverables in your electronic parts manufacturing project. Since these parts are exported to other countries, they need more testing before your customers accept them. In this scenario, which of the following statements about the completed deliverables is CORRECT?
You are managing a heavy equipment manufacturing project that involves many mechanical, electrical as well as IT staff. Your team prepared a schedule network diagram using duration estimates with dependencies and constraints. Your team also calculated the critical path for the project using late and early values. Today, your project office has indicated about the non-availability of some of the resources you planned for the project. Now, you explore the possibility of modifying the schedule to account for limited resources. What is your best possible step in such a situation?
You are working as a project manager for a high yield crop development project. Data from the weather agency shows an unfavorable weather pattern for next few months. As a senior project manager, you want to assess the feasibility of the schedule under adverse conditions and provide some insights to your team. This way, your team can prepare some reserves and plan risk responses if unfavorable conditions exist during execution. Which of the following techniques should you use to assess the feasibility of the schedule?
All of the following activities areperformed in the Close Project or Phase process EXCEPT
Your project team has recentlyidentified a risk in the software development project and decided not to change the project management plan to deal with the risk. The risk response strategy your team used in this scenario is an example of:
Which of the following does notmotivate an individual?
You have just completed the first phase of a multi-phase project. You have performed the earned value measurements and found out that the current CPI is 0.79, the current SPI is 0.98. Your next phase plan should focus first on which element of the project?
A project manager has just startedplanning his project. If he has very limited information about the project, he must use the following technique to estimate the duration for each activity:
You are in the Validate Scope process of your electronic goods manufacturing project. While reviewing some products, you have noticed that the tolerance for one product is 0.01% less than what was listed in the requirements documentation. This deviation may not be a problem for the customers and it may not negatively impact the operations. What is your best immediate action in such a situation?
You have recently taken over atroubled automobile project which has gone out of control. The project team missed many deadlines and stakeholders were not happy with the project progress. As an experienced project manager, your first priority is to bring the schedule into alignment with the project plan. You would like to use what-if scenario analysis to see how various factors affected the project schedule so that you can develop a plan to reduce the impact of adverse conditions on the project schedule in future. What would be your next course of action once you determine the factors that created schedule overrun?
Anthony is currently managing a bridge construction project. The project is in the execution phase. During the planning phase of the project, Anthony developed a comprehensive stakeholder management plan for the project. However, the frequency of the plan review has not been defined. How often should the stakeholder management plan be reviewed by Anthony?
Jim is managing a road network design project for a government agency. He is currently carrying out the Plan Stakeholder Management process for the project. Which of the following documents will provide the list of project stakeholders to Jim for this process?
Gordon is currently developing his project's stakeholder management strategy. All enterprise environmental factors should be considered during this process. Which of the following enterprise environmental factors should be paid special attention during this process?
Daniel is the project manager for a factory construction project. Daniel has recently joined this organization and is not fully aware of the organization's culture and structure. In order to manage his project stakeholders, Daniel has to understand his project stakeholders better. Which of the following can provide Daniel some historical information regarding stakeholder management on previous projects?
The Project Stakeholder Management knowledge area is focused on engaging project stakeholders with the project. What is the objective of effectively keeping the project stakeholders engaged with the project?
Christine is managing a healthcare software development project. At a PMI conference, she met George who is the project manager at a competitor organization. George is a PMP and has successfully delivered many successful healthcare related software development projects. If George shares his stakeholder management experience with Christine, will that be considered Expert Judgment?
Sandra is managing a new supersonic aircraft design project. This is a huge project and the success of this project is very critical for her organization. For such mission-critical projects, which of the following is the most desirable engagement level for all major project stakeholders?
Greg's project is in the initiating stage. The sponsor of the project has asked Greg to present a list of the identified project stakeholders in the next project update meeting. He has also asked Greg to present the project stakeholders current and desired engagement levels so that they can brainstorm on the stakeholder management strategy. Which of the following is a presentation tool that can help Greg summarize all of this information in a tabular format?
Diana is managing the development of a mobile phone application. Half of the project work has been completed. Diana is currently reviewing her stakeholder management plan. She finds out that some of the resisting stakeholders have now become supportive. How should Diana update her stakeholder management plan?
You have just initiated a project to establish windmills in a developing country. To celebrate the initiation of the project, the customers arranged a party in which a key customer offered valuables to all of your project team members including yourself with a request to complete the project sooner than the actual finish date. What should you do?
You have recently started working as a project manager for a public school construction project. Your analysis shows that the cost estimate for the project seems to be unreasonable and it could take at least 25% more to complete the project. What should you do if your sponsor wants to carryout the project with another project manager in case you refuse to accept it?
You have recently started working as a project manager for a health insurance portal development project. The project sponsor tells you that due to the critical nature of the project the work must start immediately and complete in two weeks. Based on the instructions, you have started documenting major constraints and assumptions to perform the project feasibility study. What should you do if you are able to prepare only the high-level feasibility study in the given time frame?
Danny has been working as a project manager for a company which provides outsourcing services to banks. Recently, he has sent a proposal to a local bank in response to a bid for a data warehouse project in which his company lacks expertise. Although his company lacks expertise, it has good working relationship with the bank in all other projects. Which of the following statements is correct considering the proposal that Danny submitted?
In a software development project, Debby, the project manager completed developing a charter and identification of stakeholders. Since multiple contracts are involved in the project, Debby has collected proprietary information from vendors during the planning process to decide on the contract. What should Debby do when a functional manager from the same organization wants to see this information?
You are responsible for developing high-level risks, assumptions, and constraints for your project. You meet with experts in your organization and understand various risks in the project. However, you notice a significant risk to the project based on the historical data from a previous project about which nobody is aware of. What should you do to continue the project?
You are using the one-on-one interview technique to gather high-level risks, assumptions, and constraints in an infrastructure development project to set up a bank. During the interview process a key stakeholder tells you that the project might end up in failure due to lack of support from the local people. What should you do in this situation?
You have started a project to establish a railroad between two neighboring cities. The state agency that sponsors this project is very much committed to complete this project on time and within budget. To support the agency's intention, you have completed the charter and started identifying stakeholders who would support the project. You would like to gather as many stakeholders as possible to successfully complete this project and move on to the planning phase. What should a project manager do while identifying stakeholders in a project?
Due to shortage of resources, a project manager has made a decision in a 3year construction project to develop a partial work break down structure (WBS) in the beginning of the planning phase. The WBS will be expanded as more information is known in the near term. What should the project manager do if a key resource criticizes her decision to develop the partial WBS?
You are using parametric estimating techniques to estimate costs for each activity and the total budget in your project. However, a project manager who is a colleague of you tells you to bump up each estimate by 20% to account for any unknown risks and submit that as a total budget for the customers. What should you do?
Two of your team members are in constant argument with each other on work assignments. Due to their attitude, the project is getting delayed and pressure is building on other team members. What should you do?
After several brainstorming sessions with customers, Kurt established various project deliverables in an IT project. Two weeks later, While reviewing the plan, Kurt identifies two similar deliverables and determines to merge both of them into a single deliverable. What should Kurt do next?
The management of a retail business unit has just assigned Mario to compare multiple projects and select a best project that will produce most value for the unit. Although Mario has been working as a project manager for a long time, he has a very limited knowledge and understanding on the project selection methods. What should be the first course of action from Mario in this scenario?
You are hired by a company to work as a project manager in a foreign country. You discover that you must pay kickbacks to the officials to get licenses in your project. What should you do?
Jack is currently identifying stakeholders in his automobile project. While talking to his senior manager, Jack learns that one of the key stakeholders, who he identified in his project, is so influential that he was able to dismiss an IT project before moving into the planning phase. What should Jack do with such influential stakeholders?
While conducting interviews for a project manager position you happen to see your classmate in the list of prospective candidates. What would you do immediately?
While talking to your one of your team leaders you discover that he was in constant criticism from a team member about the allocation of tasks. The team leader also indicates that the specific team member also delays many tasks causing delays in the project schedule. What action should you take as a project manager?
You have recently acquired a project from a PMP certified project manager, who has been removed from the project due to incompetency and lack of skills. When you happen to meet him outside your building, he started rebuking you for taking his project. He even goes so far as to suggest that your religion plays a part in your selection by the management. What should you do FIRST?
In a manufacturing project, you have requested bids to procure stainless steel products. But, your sponsor insists you to conduct bidder conferences before selecting sellers. What mandatory standard in PMI code of ethics and professional conduct would be satisfied by conducting bidder conferences?
You are using joint application development (JAD) sessions in a software development project to collect product requirements from stakeholders. Which of the following mandatory standard in the PMI code of ethics and professional conduct is fulfilled with JAD sessions while gathering requirements?
A functional manager in your organization has recently filed a complaint against a junior project manager regarding his project management certification. The functional manager claims that the PMP certification claimed by the junior project manager is false and needs to be verified. What should be your response as a senior project manager?
While conducting a brainstorming session to identify stakeholders, a process manager disagrees with you on a decision you have made regarding the influence and impact of each stakeholder on the project. He even makes some comments against you in front of other stakeholders. As a senior project manager what should be your immediate response?
Which of the following has been identified as one of the single biggest reasons for project success or failure?
You have given a chemical manufacturing project that could potentially contaminate the ground water in the neighboring residential community. After detailed analysis, you learn that the impact could be severe over long run. If the sponsor of the project wants to complete this project PMP Focus Area Test: Professional and So as soon as possible, being a senior project management practitioner you must:
You are working in a software development project in which specialized resources are required to perform some tasks. You estimate that these resources will be required during the executing phase of the project. However, your estimation fails to account for the fact that these resources will be available for only limited hours in the executing phase. What should you do to make schedule changes based on the limited availability?
A project manager has completed identification of stakeholders and started planning for a flow instruments installation project in a hospital. While developing the project management plan, a team member indicates that a stakeholder in the X-Ray department is missing from the stakeholder's list. Which of the following statements indicate the BEST response from the project manager?
While gathering high-level business requirements for a software development project using facilitated sessions, one of your customers proposes a requirement which may not be possible due to technological limitations. If the customer insists on the requirement what should you do?
You have just started leading a World bank health care development project in an developing country in which it is customary to offer lunch when a project is initiated. Although, your team members are willing to accept the offer, you decide to refuse the offer since you are well-aware that the PMI's code of ethics and professional conduct does not allow to take gifts. Which of the following statements are TRUE considering your decision?
Communication methods is a tool and technique of what process?
Avoid is a tool and technique of what process?
The cost of quality is a tool and technique of what process(es)?
Cost-benefit analysis is a tool and technique of what process?
The people famous for Plan-Do-Check-Act are:
The change management plan is an output of what process?
The configuration management plan is an output of what process?
Sensitivity analysis is a tool and technique of what process?
Fixed price contracts and cost-reimbursable contracts are inputs to:
Funding limit reconciliation is a tool and technique of what process?
Overlapping activities or running them in parallel when we would prefer to run them in sequence is called:
Benchmarking is a tool and technique of what process?
Organizational theory is a tool and technique of what process?
The document that describes how the project scope will be defined, documented, validated, managed, and controlled is called?
The document that sets the criteria for planning and controlling project costs is called?
The document that describes the scheduling methodology, format, etc. is called?
Make or buy analysis is a general management technique used in?
Roles and responsibilities and the project organization chart are subsets of what plan?
Looking at other organizations to set quality standards and learn best practices is called?
The document that shows the planned start and finish dates for each project activity is called?
A bidder conference is a tool and technique of what process?
Buying insurance is an example of what risk response technique?
Ground rules are a tool and technique of what process?
Advertising is a tool and technique of what process?
Teambuilding, used to build trust, is a tool and technique of what process?
Quality audits are a tool and technique of what process?
Deliverables are an output of what process?
Work performance information is an output of what process?
Project performance appraisals are a tool and technique of what process?
Pre-assignment, often as part of a competitive proposal process, is a tool and technique of what process?
The customer accepts the project deliverables during what process?
The deliverables are tested for correctness during what process?
Ensuring that the processes we are using are working is part of what process?
Setting priority for future risk work is the objective of what process?
Risk reassessment is a tool and technique of what process?
Change requests are an input to what process?
Approved change requests are an output of what process?
The project management information system is a tool of what process(es)?
Change control tools are a tool and technique of what process?
The document that describes explicitly what is out of scope is called?
The WBS is:
The relationship between the scope management plan and the project management plan is described by which of the following?
Critical path method is a tool and technique of what process?
All of the following are strategies to deal with risks with potentially positive impacts on project objectives except:
Pre-assignment, negotiation, acquisition, and virtual teams are tools and techniques of:
One tool and technique to help manage the project team is:
Alternative generation is a tool and technique of what process(es)?
Ad hoc conversations with our peers are examples of what type of communication?
Which statement represents the relationship between precision and accuracy?
Virtual teams support all the following except:
The risks placed on a watch list for continued monitoring usually include:
The leadership style that has the most risk of "perceived lip service" is:
The upper and lower control limits are usually set at:
The 50-50 rule of progress reporting states that:
Your map-making project has been going very well. With great resistance from upper management you have been using the technique of rolling wave planning. You are at the point of planning the closing of the project. The last thing we often do on projects is:
Project scope creep is another name for:
Your management is going through their quarterly process of project selection. In the past the organization has always used benefit measurement methods to select projects. It seems now they want to use constrained optimization methods. Which method below is your organization most likely to use now?
As a project manager in the electronics field, it is clear that your projects are not top priority. After speaking with your management it is clear that the real issue is that your projects are not aligned with the corporate objectives. You convince your organization that one approach to help with alignment is to adopt the Management by Objectives (MBO) concept developed by Peter Drucker. All of the following are ideas associated with the objectives except:
After several months of negotiations your organization is almost ready to sign a contract. The contract will span multiple years and allow for final price adjustments based on changing conditions. The ideal contract type is:
Your organization is in the process of identifying risks for your project. You explain that there are really two types of risks called:
All of the following statements are true about communication blockers except:
Maslow's highest level, self-actualization needs, can be met in the workplace through:
During control quality it has been determined that several of the deliverables due today do not meet the technical specifications. A change request has been generated and will be approved or rejected in which process?
Colocation is most often associated with the:
A system upgrade project is 60% complete. There are over 250 stakeholders located at hospitals throughout the region. The project is running on budget and slightly ahead of schedule. Risk management has been provided throughout the project. During control project risks several large risks have been closed out since the project is past the point when these threats would occur. Large cost contingencies had been set-up for these threats. The unused contingency should be:
A customer has come to you requesting a major change to the project objectives. You realize that changing the objectives means changing the project charter. History tells you that when the objectives in the project charter change, the projects in your organization are much more likely to fail. You and your sponsor have seen this over and over again, and therefore your sponsor is not likely to approve this change even though he strongly agrees that the change to the charter would benefit the project. To increase the chances of project success, the most important consideration is:
You have just become the project manager of a project that involves designing and building a factory. The project has numerous stakeholders, including several government agencies. The project is already behind schedule and over budget. Providing for risk management is critical to the project's success because the factory will contain rooms that will house hazardous chemicals and gases. Since these rooms will be considered high risk areas when the factory is operational alarm systems are being identified for installation in case of a leak or spill of hazardous materials. Alarm #1 will sound if there is a gas leak, and its activation requires personnel to put on gas masks but continue to work in the factory without evacuating. Alarm #2's activation will notify factory personnel to shut down operations and then evacuate the building. The activation of Alarm #2 signals that which of the following has been reached?
You have been working as an engineer for many years in your organization. Just over a year ago, you were promoted to a project management role and assigned a very large project. Your team has over 400 team members from around the world. Your technical background did not prepare you for the work you are doing today. Most of your team members are virtual. Your current focus is on negotiating for the team members you need and facilitating team building activities for the team members you already have working. In what project management process group are you currently engaged in?
Your organization has just been awarded the largest contract in its 40-year history. Because of your 10-year history with the organization, you have been selected to lead the project. Based on rumors you have heard, you expect the project to last over 5 years and to have at least 300 stakeholders from dozens of countries. Performing on schedule is critical. Even though no sponsor has been assigned, you begin work on the project charter. However, your manager tells you there isn't time to worry about a charter and directs you to begin working on the project plan instead. What should you do now?
The construction of a new soccer stadium in your country is finally complete. The first large sporting event to be held there, a tournament is about to begin. Over the next few days, athletes will begin to arrive from several different countries. The tournament will run for five consecutive evenings. There seems to be confusion on basic issues related to transportation and housing for the athletes. What should you do first?
Variations inside the control limits on a control chart provides us information related to ?
What is the duration of the critical path?
What is the float of Task D?
What activities are on the critical path?
Your project is to oversee the design and implementation of a new patient information system for a large chain of hospitals. You have the technical background to accomplish the project, and your team is highly qualified. The project seems to be running smoothly except for an issue of the wrong stakeholders getting the wrong information at the wrong time and in the wrong format. Some stakeholders are receiving information that does not interest them but are not receiving information they need to perform their roles on the project. The process that could have prevented this problem from occurring is:
You are managing the equipment installation of a new factory. Over 30 different suppliers will be working for you over a three-year period. Each supplier's work is contingent on the other suppliers meeting their timelines. To meet the scheduled end date provided by management, one critical supplier, Kirkpatrick and Associates, must begin work now, and thereby incurring costs immediately. Contract negotiations with Kirkpatrick have been ongoing for months, and you expect several more weeks will be required for all details to be worked out and the contract to be signed. However, this delay will make meeting your project end date impossible. While negotiations continue, you will most likely send Kirkpatrick a:
The Olympics are coming to your hometown. Excitement builds as transportation systems are upgraded, venues are built, and the world watches. It has been decided that meeting the schedule is more important than minimizing cost at this point. Because a delay is unacceptable, , we decide to use Monte Carlo simulation to simulate the schedule. We most likely will run Monte Carlo simulations on a weekly basis to help us account for uncertainty. Which of the following is used as a model in a schedule risk analysis?
You have been assigned the project manager of a project to replace an existing bridge on a major road through Colorado Springs. You have managed several similar projects in the past and are excited about having another highly visible project to manage. The project will include working with many organizations, including the city, the county, the police department, and several suppliers. Your sponsor, who is very involved, has already issued a project charter. He has also helped you navigate the political environment. You have a complete project plan including baselines for scope, time, and cost. As the work progresses you issue status reports and hold progress meetings for all interested stakeholders. After twelve months, the bridge is constructed within budget and on schedule. All requirements have been met. During your final lessons learned meeting, you present that the project experienced 25% more change requests than other comparable projects. The most likely reason for this was:
For the first 24 months, your project progressed well and team members worked together successfully. Now, however, the project schedule has been pulled in dramatically to address a changing market window. Meetings are tense, and conflict is rising with the biggest issue concerning accountability. You want to use a tool to make it clear who is the one person accountable for each activity. Most likely you will use a(n):
Severe weather has hit your community. Bridges and roads have been washed away by the flooding. Your project is to oversee the re-construction of a major highway. Many stakeholders are involved in the project, including your friends and neighbors. Everyone has an opinion as to what is necessary to ensure quality construction. Due to time constraints, you need a tool that will help you focus on the most critical issues related to quality. Most likely you will use a:
Nick is a project manager with 30 years of experience managing his organization's most successful projects. He now works in the PMO developing business cases and performing feasibility studies for future projects. The head of the PMO just rushed into Nick's office and requested that Nick develop a cost estimate for a potential customer's project in the next 15 minutes. The organization completed a project similar to the one being described just this past year. Therefore, Nick will most likely use what type of cost estimating technique?
A project manager for a large construction company is responsible for the construction of a new football stadium. Over 100 different vendors are involved. The lead scheduler provided the project manager with an integrated schedule. The schedule had taken weeks to develop and would require close management. The project has four critical paths. One critical activity on the schedule is pouring the concrete. Once poured, the concrete will require five to seven days to cure. During this timem many team members will take a short vacation, since they have been working around the clock. Curing of the concrete is an example of:
Several of your team members hope to move into project management positions. All will be taking the CAPM(R) exam shortly and are currently studying the PMBOK(R) Guide. They come to you and ask for help understanding the difference between the plan human resource management process and the estimate activity resources process. Their view is that both processes relate to planning for people, and therefore there is duplication in the PMBOK(R) Guide. You explain that:
The project SPI is 1.12, and its CPI is 1.2. The schedule shows an end date four months from today. At your monthly status meeting, your customer expresses pleasure with the project's progress. Two days later this customer requests that additional scope be added since there is "extra" time in the schedule and "extra" money in the budget. This behavior is not new; this customer regularly requests additional work once he sees the project is ahead of schedule and/or under budget. Requested changes are an output of what process?
You oversee drug trials for a global pharmaceutical company. In the pharmaceutical industry, project management is key to addressing the unique regulatory-, compliance-, and quality-related needs of the industry. Change control is a critical component of successful project management for all projects but even more so in your industry. Which of the following is not one of the elements of the perform integrated change control process?
Your organization's PMO has just rolled out a project management methodology that has been tested and proven on a very large successful project. You manage multiple small projects and have been instructed to apply this detailed methodology to each of these. The best thing to do is:
As a program manager, you have seventeen project managers reporting to you. Some are members of PMI(R) and some are not. All the junior project managers are CAPM(R) certified, while all the senior project managers are PMP(R) certified. A few new project managers have joined your group in the last few months and have submitted their application for PMP(R) certification. Based on the fact that all of your staff are either certified through PMI(R) or have submitted applications to be certified, which document must all of your staff adhere to?
One of your team members asks you who should receive a copy of the performance report just completed. You respond:
You have taken over a project from another project manager. The project seems to be running very smoothly. As the project nears completion, several team members feel they are ready to move on to other projects. Based on past experience, you know that a lot more work is involved in project close-out than people often realize. From your perspective, much work remains to be done, and conflict is starting to arise concerning release criteri
In your lumber company, three standard deviations has been your standard for decades. Your new quality manager wants to adopt a six sigma approach. Which of the following statements is true?
Your project is running so far over budget that you can no longer provide a realistic basis for performance measurement. Your next step is to:
As a project scheduler you are trying to use statistics as part of project scheduling. If Activity A has a pessimistic estimate of 24 days and an optimistic estimate of 12 days, what is the variance of Activity A?
You have just received your PMP(R) and are now serving as a mentor for new project managers. All are arguing that a WBS is really a long list of items to be completed. You explain that a WBS is all of the following except:
As a project manager for a large international organization, you often run projects in many parts of the world. Business practices often differ, depending on your location. As a Project Management Professional (PMP(R)), the PMI(R) Code of Ethics and Professional Conduct guides your actions. Which of the following is not one of the four core values described in the PMI(R) Code of Ethics and Professional Conduct?
As the project manager for the equipment installations of a new factory, you expect to deal repeatedly with Lewis and Associates, a plumbing firm. You don't know the exact quantity or exact products you will be buying from this firm, but you expect to buy from them frequently over the next 18 months. You are most likely to want to sign a:
You have been working all week in Baltimore and plan to fly home to New York late tonight. New York experiences an unexpected snow storm and consequently the airport may have to close. You cancel your flight and rent a car in order to get home. As you are driving, you hear on the radio that the highway is closing 50 miles north of you. The closing of the highway is an example of a:
A project manager developing a global website recognizes that stakeholder involvement is key to project success. On past projects, he has delivered on all the requirements but some stakeholders were not satisfied. He wants a table that shows not only the current levels of stakeholder involvement but also the desired levels. From this, he can develop his stakeholder strategy. The project manager most likely will utilize a:
On your software development project, accurately estimating the durations of activities is important. You suggest to management that PERT estimates be completed for each activity. You give them the following example. Your programmer estimates that 100 hours will most likely be required to complete the work. However, an optimistic estimate is 80 hours, whereas a pessimistic estimate is 150 hours. The PERT estimate is:
The project is to design a "future car" that emphasizes not only safety but also comfort and cost. An important part of the design of this future car is determining which combination of suspension and tires will produce the most pleasurable ride characteristics at a reasonable price. To determine the best combination, the engineers will most likely use a(n):
Once again you are estimating the cost for your new project. Your team members have expressed frustration in the past that you are unclear about the rounding you want in their estimates. For example, should they round up or down? In actuality, they are asking you about the required:
After reviewing the project schedule, management asks why all of the work packages are different sizes. They suggest that you consider the 80 hour rule. The 80 hour rule is an example of:
A project to build a semiconductor factory is drawing to a close. The factory's operations group has begun manufacturing the wafers that, after processing will be the chips we use in our phones and computers. As the wafers pass through each piece of equipment on the factory floor, tracking performance over time of these processes is necessary to ensure these processes are stable. Which of the seven basic quality tools are we likely to use in the tracking process?
Based on lessons learned you realize that maintaining the integrity of project baselines has been a real challenge. It seems that some non-approved changes were released for incorporation into the project products and that some approved changes never made it into the project products. To better manage this in the future tighter control will need to occur in what process?
You have been working as a project manager for six years but have never really had to manage a project budget before. This is changing now that money has become tighter. Based on your experience and your outside reading, which of the following statements is false?
The project is to upgrade the organization's entire customer engagement system. The upgrade will occur in thirty (30) hospitals around the country. The project team will utilize fifty (50) different suppliers over a three year time period. With each procurement, it is important that there is a clear understanding of the requirement and that no one receive preferential treatment. To ensure this during the conduct procurement process we will most likely utilize:
Examples of mitigate include all of the following except:
A project report is an example of what type of communication?
Zero sum rewards are rewards that:
You have been studying for the PMP(R) Exam for the last several months. For you, the best study method is to review many sample questions and learn from each one. To guide and focus your studies you would like to be able to see the frequency that you are missing questions by knowledge are
On what contract type does the buyer typically have the lowest risk?
When you first planned the development of your organization's new medical device, it seemed that most of the activities contained float. You met with your team to develop the schedule and explained float to all team members. Now you are running with several critical paths with more paths becoming critical each month. The likely cause of this is:
After years of frustration, the project is finally over. In the end, the customer made payment but it is clear they will never use the product delivered to them. The most important lesson learned from this project was that the project team's interpretation of the project's deliverables must match the customer's interpretation of the project's deliverables. While the product met the technical requirements, it was clear throughout the project that the customer was often surprised by our deliverables. The documented lesson learned is: Different individuals may have different interpretations of a project's work packages. To decrease the probability of this in the future each project should now include:
Examples of constrained optimization methods used for project selection include:
You have spent months with your team planning your project, and it is now time to begin the executing work. Executing involves all of the following processes except:
You are the manager of the design/build of a large manufacturing facility. With your customer, you have signed a Fixed Price Incentive Contract. You recognize that in this type of contract the risk is shared between the buyer and the seller. The time at which your organization picks up all of the financial risk is called the:
In your product development group, risk management has always been a low priority. Management does not want to talk about risk until the risk event has occurred. You are trying to explain the importance of timing to management. One idea you share is:
You are the project manager for a logging company. During the current month, you are committed to deliver 10,000 units that are 60 centimeters each. The upper control limits on your process is 63 centimeters. The lower control limits on your process is 57 centimeters. The mean is 60 centimeters. What percentage of your units should fall between 58 and 62 centimeters?
Under McGregor's Theory Y, the management view is that most people:
The project is to design and build a new website for all 30 schools in the local school district. Many stakeholders want to be included as we collect requirements. Collecting early feedback on requirements is important. It has been strongly suggested that we employ storyboards to do so. These storyboards will use mockups to show navigation paths through pages, screens, etc. Storyboarding in an example of:
Your project has over 200 stakeholders. The stakeholders are located in 20 different countries and speak too many languages for you to name. In fact, your manager lives in another country and speaks a different language than you. Your SPI is running at .85. The CPI is running at 1.2. Based on this scenario, what should you be most concerned about?
You are managing a large ship-building project for a government customer. The project has been progressing well from both schedule and cost standpoints. Due to global events, the customer has requested that you pull in the schedule by several months. No additional resources will be made available. To complete the project under these new constraints you will:
After months of planning, you are at the point of having your baselines approved. All of the following documents are part of the scope baseline except the:
The system that identifies and documents the functional and physical characteristics of a product or component is called:
A contract change control system is normally part of what process?
Your organization has become very good at assessing and evaluating characteristics of individual project risks. Management is now asking you to provide an estimate of the overall effect of risk on the project objectives. Management is really asking you to:
When using rolling wave planning:
The type of power anyone can earn, regardless of his position is:
Your medical component business is growing at an exponential rate. With respect to product testing, you are moving to testing samples instead of entire populations. In general, the main reasons to test samples instead of populations include all of the following except:
The performance measurement baseline is made up of what categories:
Your program manager has just returned from a class on program/project management and is filled with ideas. He seems to be using the terms fast tracking and concurrent engineering interchangeably. You try to explain the primary difference by stating:
If a project is performed through a legal relationship, the constraints are defined:
It is hard to imagine a project without change requests. Change requests on projects may be either rejected or approved. Approved changes are processed through which process for implementation?
You are managing the design/build of a small office building. With your customer, you have signed a Cost Plus Incentive Contract. The negotiated pricing for the contract is: target cost: $100,000 target fee: $ 8,000 max fee: $ 12,000 min fee: $ 4,000 share ratio: 60/40 (buyer/seller) You complete the work for $105,000. What fee will you receive?
While working on a construction project, you submitted the required paperwork for an environmental permit on time. You are concerned that the permitting agency may take longer than planned to issue the permit. If this occurs, the project will be at least three weeks late, and may run over budget by at least $20,000. Quality may also suffer, but you do not know how to quantify the quality degradation. The risk event in the above scenario is:
In the communication model, who is responsible for encoding the initial message?
The technique to manage conflict that emphasizes areas of agreement while avoiding points of disagreement is:
Common causes of variation are also called:
Which classification model describes classes of stakeholders based on the power, urgency, and legitimacy?
Along with your project management team you have spent a great deal of time developing the WBS, schedule, and cost estimates for a project. Your work has finally been approved, and you now have baselines for the triple constraint. What do you do next?
Your technology transfer project is wrapping up and you are determining the current status of the project's scope. Completion of project scope is measured against all of the following except the:
You are managing a technology transfer project moving technology from a development line into a manufacturing line. The manufacturing manager has requested yet another change. As you evaluate this change, you note that it would have a major effect on high-level project objectives. If a decision is made to accept this change, what document must be changed first?
You have been assigned as the project manager for a large technology transfer project. The technology will be developed in Sweden and then transferred to manufacturing facilities in several countries including Chin
The project manager has been brought in long before initiating the project is complete. Often the first task performed while initiating a project is:
Projects may produce benefits as well as deliverables. For a benefit to have value, the benefit must be realized:
Benefits analysis should ensure that the project aligns with the organizational strategy. Organizational strategy is the result of:
You have just been moved onto a project that is well into the project implementation phase. You want to be clear on the priority you should use for stakeholder requests so you search for the stakeholder register. You then realize that no stakeholder register exists for the project. Since you are new to the organization, you want to ensure that you use its templates for documents. Therefore you search for a template for a stakeholder register in the:
On your project, deliverables frequently occur at the wrong time. Sometimes customers receive deliverables early, sometime late. Whether too early or too late, your customers never seem to receive the deliverables when they would derive the most value from them. Therefore, it was suggested that you consider implementing just-in-time thinking. Just-in-time is related to what type of system?
During the implementation phase of your project, many deliverables have been produced on time and within budget. At this point, it is important that the deliverables are tested to determine if we are building the product correctly. We most likely determine this during which process?
As part of your role as a project manager you are responsible for capturing critical knowledge. You are likely to use all of the following methods for capturing knowledge except:
As part of your knowledge transfer life cycle, applying the knowledge that has been transferred is important. A technology often used to apply transferred knowledge is:
You have been named the project manager of a project to design, build and set up a customer call center. This call center has been deemed to be vital to driving the organization's strategy forward. After the project is complete, your organization will track the number of new customers based on the success of the call center. The number of new customers is considered a(n):
Nicholas is managing a project to integrate multiple customer relationship management systems into one enterprise-wide system. The work is very technical in nature, and Nicholas was chosen as the project manager due to his strong technical education and experience. As part of managing the project, Nicholas must interact with multiple business unit leaders throughout the organization to understand how his actions and decisions affect their business units. While Nicholas has strong technical skills, he is struggling with respect to the appropriate terminology to use when interacting with these other leaders. At this point, Nicholas may want to focus more on:
An organization scoring low on Geert Hofstede's dimension for individualism believes in:
Most of your project team is struggling with Rich, the team's senior designer. Rich has trouble controlling and redirecting his disruptive behaviors and impulses as well as adapting to changing situations. Based on Daniel Goleman's mixed model for emotional intelligence, Rich needs to work more on:
All of the following are examples of items normally placed under configuration control except:
The project decision-making processes are typically included in the:
Your project is approaching a critical milestone. At this milestone, you will need to decide if the project should maintain its current course or drastically change how the work is being performed. Making a good decision is crucial, but you are concerned that you do not have all the detailed knowledge required to adequately weigh all the options available. Therefore you need input from several of your key team members. At this point, what decision-making style are you most likely to use?
You are nearing the end of the project and have begun compiling all of your lessons learned. Collecting lessons learned is important in order to:
You project is running with a CPI of 1.2. The EAC is $100,000. What is the BAC?
You are working on a medical device development project. Your organization embraced project management about a year ago and many of your team members now have their PMP(R). At this point, you are developing your network diagrams. There is a heated discussion about whether to use the critical path method or the critical chain method. You explain the difference by stating:
The document that states explicitly what the project excludes is the:
It has been determined that several deliverables due today do not meet the technical specifications. A change request has been generated and approved. The defect is repaired, or so it seems. During what process are changes validated?
Termination may occur for all of the following reasons except:
We are presently trying to identify potential risks on our project. In our organization, the senior people often dominate meetings and everyone else simply goes along with their ideas. One technique to identify risk that keeps one person from unduly influencing the outcome is:
The CPI= .8 and the SPI=1.1. How is your project doing?
Rank ordering of defects is done through:
Parametric estimates are most likely to be accurate when all the following statements are true except:
Notification from the customer that the terms of the contract have been met is done during which process?
An organizational culture is often reflected in all of the following except?
An example of horizontal communication is communication:
The stages of team development in proper order are:
You want to be able to systematically change all of the important factors for a product or process, rather than one factor at a time, to provide the optimal conditions for the product or process. Based on this need, you are most likely to use:
The BAC (budget at completion) for your project is $100,000. Your EAC is $120,000. What is the CPI?
The vast majority of the project budget is spent during which process group?
You work in a large mapmaking organization. Your project is a new product development. At your first team meeting, you are trying to help your team understand the difference between product scope and project scope. All of the following statements are true except:
After your last status meeting, your customer has come to you with a change request. What should you do first?
As the new business manager for a large construction company, it is important for you to be able to quantify new opportunities. You are currently looking at a new venture and have determined that there is a 20% probability of income in year one of $40,000. There is a 30% probability of income in year one of $10,000 and there is a 50% probability of a loss of $20,000 in the first year. What is the expected monetary value of this venture for year one?
If earned value is higher than planned value:
Examining project performance over time to determine if performance is improving or deteriorating is called:
When a project terminates early, what process should be followed to document the level and extent of completion?
Reserve analysis during the control risks process looks at:
If actual cost is higher than earned value:
Your quality manager comes to you with a list of tools typically used to plan quality. This list is likely to include all the following except:
You have been assigned to a project which has major cost and schedule overruns, as well as a long list of uncontrolled changes. Uncontrolled changes are also known as:
If your project is running on budget, the CPI is:
You have been managing a large mapmaking project for the government. Your customer is asking for multiple scope changes. As you review these changes, you are trying to determine the true magnitude of these changes. You are most likely to review what document?
The schedule baseline is an output of which process:
Your business is building and maintaining the country's railroad systems. Projects have always been managed using a functional structure but you, as a new project manager, are advocating to move to a projectized structure. What disadvantage of a projectized structure might a functional manager use to support remaining with a functional structure:
EAC= (BAC/CPI) is the equation used for calculating an estimate at completion when:
Based on your success on previous projects, you have been asked to manage a project for a different department in your organization. This department has documented processes for most of their work. You realize that you will need to tailor many of their standard processes so that they will make sense for your new project. Which organizational process asset will probably help you the most:
As a project manager in a global company, you realize that you need not only project management skills but also interpersonal skills. Decision-making is an example of an interpersonal skill. Which of the following is not an element of decision-making?
An emergency has occurred and you urgently need a safety contractor to do some consulting work for you. In this circumstance, you are most likely to use a:
The forecasted estimate at completion is also called the:
You are a project manager who manages equipment installations in an automobile manufacturing facility. Early in the planning process, you are asked to generate ideas for improvement and to provide a basis by which to measure performance. You are most likely to use:
Cost forecasts are an output of what process?
It is early in a software development project, and the core team is in the process of collecting requirements. Key inputs the team should review are?
You have moved into the project management role for a project to develop the marketing collateral for a major ad campaign. The collateral will be both hard copy and electronic. Thousands of project stakeholders will receive the benefits of your work. At this point, more than 80 percent of the work is complete. The project has 147 team members. Most of the team members have limited experience with the new technology being used to design the collateral. There seems to have been little work done so far related to risk. You should begin with which process:
If your project is over budget, your cost variance (CV) is:
As you are walking through your project's construction site a fire breaks out and you realize chaos will likely ensue. The site safety manager is most likely to use which conflict resolution technique in this situation to evacuate people from the site quickly?
Your work on the project is expected to be constant for the six-month length of the project. During each month, your budget is $200. At the end of month four, you have 40% of the total work completed and you have spent 70% of your total budget. The project's budget at completion for the project is:
Projects within a given organization have all the following in common except:
As a project manager in the software industry, you find your projects are overridden with requested changes. You try to explain to your customers the effect changes have on the competing project constraints. One simple way to explain the idea is that, if one constraint changes:
A procurement audit:
Several of your key engineers are constantly showing up late for work. When they do finally arrive they are dressed very well, much better in fact than is standard practice in your firm. You wonder if what you are noticing is really a warning sign that they have been interviewing with other companies. Another name for a warning sign is a:
Cost estimates based on project team members' recollections are generally:
You are struggling to get your team members focused on your project. It seems that priorities across the projects in the program are unclear. Setting priorities across projects inside a program is most often handled by:
Due to your great success on your last project, you have been assigned to a new project with a very difficult customer. Based on lessons learned from others, you recognize that your project having well-defined acceptance criteria is critically important. Which of the following statements is false in regards to acceptance criteria?
The work of your project is expected to be at a constant level over the life of the project. The project schedule is for six months. Each month's budget is $200. At the end of month four, you have 40% of the total work completed and you have spent 70% of your total budget. The planned value for the project is:
You are involved in the design/build of a large manufacturing facility. The project life cycle is expected to span several years. You are able to do a detailed WBS for the early phases but not for the later phases. However, your management believes that all sections of the WBS should be decomposed to the same level at the same time. You need to explain what concept to them?
The project is to provide clean safe drinking water to an isolated community that has been hit by massive droughts. The CPI is .90. The project is two weeks behind schedule and the project has over 30 stakeholders. Where should you increase your emphasis?
In your organization, the terms "projects", "programs", and "portfolios" are often used interchangeably. You explain to management the differences between these words. Which of the following is a true statement?
You are working on your first large-scale project. The project's CPI is .97. The project is running five weeks behind schedule and has over 300 stakeholders. Where should you, the project manager, increase your emphasis?
At the start, Project A has an initial investment of $80,000. At the end of year one, the project has a benefit of $50,000 and at the end of year two, it has another benefit of $30,000. The project has no other benefits. Use a discount rate (interest rate) of 8%. What is the net present value of Project A?
Your project is to build the first green roof in your island community. Green roofs serve many purposes including absorbing rainfall, providing insulation, and creating a habitat for wildlife. The government has created a new regulation related to collecting rain water that may affect your project. Based on this government mandate, what should you do first?
In the past, your organization has done a poor job of "killing" projects. To be more proactive, a portfolio steering committee has been formed. The committee is holding its first quarterly meeting. One of the committee's primary responsibilities is to review the list of current and future projects and perform project selection. You have been assigned the responsibility of ensuring that the committee members have all the information they need to make good decisions. When selecting projects the committee should take into account all of the following except:
As a member of the quality control department it is your responsibility to teach an entry-level course to all technical personnel. One idea this course must address is the difference between tolerances and control limits. Which statement below is true?
As part of the plan procurements process you are trying to decide if you should rent or buy a piece of equipment. To rent the equipment will cost $100/week. The purchase price of the equipment will be $900 plus a usage cost of $10/week. When will the cost-to-rent equal the cost-to-buy?
Your project is expected to run for three consecutive years. Your organization is introducing earned value management as part of the planning and managing of this project. Your project assistant does all the earned value calculations for you but has a hard time interpreting the results. The project budget $100,000. The budget is consistent across the three years. You are exactly 18 months into the project. 30 percent of the total budget has been spent and 40% of the work is complete. Your project is:
The portfolio steering committee is holding its quarterly project selection meeting. At this point, the committee is considering four new projects. The projects are similar in nature. The primary difference is their payment period. Project A has a payback period of 8 months. Project B has a payback period of 10 months. Project C has a payback period of 12 months. Project D has a payback period of 22 months. Based on this limited information, the project most likely to be selected is:
You were selected to lead the project that will move the organization into a leadership role in social medi
Your risk manager likes to use expected monetary value to quantify risk. However, some of your stakeholders seem to ignore expected monetary value and instead base their risk decisions on the satisfaction they derive from each option. This theory is called:
A new technician has joined your team. He and your sponsor worked together in a previous organization. Whenever you direct the work of the team, he brings up what he apparently thinks the sponsor would like the team to do. As a result, the members of your team are confused as to from whom they should receive direction. The power being exercised by your new technician is an example of:
You are conducting lessons learned on your project. The final SPI is 1.00. The final CPI is 1.12. There were 150 geographically dispersed team members. Although the customer accepted the final product, the customer has decided to shelve it. Where might you have put more focus than you did?
You have taken over a project in a matrix environment that has not been performing well. Many of the stakeholders are resistant and cannot agree on the path to move forward. The best approach you can take to resolve this issue is to:
The conflict resolution technique that will, without fail, resolve a conflict quickly but should only be used as a last resort is:
Your quality control group has recommended statistical sampling, which is often conducted for all the following reasons except:
A project manager should be rewarded on cost elements he can actually influence. Which of the following is hardest for the project manager to influence?
As a project manager in the pharmaceutical industry, your projects include performing many drug trials. To accurately represent these required activities on your network diagrams, you need to include conditional statements. Most likely, what type of network diagramming technique is your project using?
The WBS dictionary is developed during which process:
Your contractor is reporting cost performance to you on a monthly basis using CPI. History has shown that the project's CPI often becomes stable when what percent of the work is complete?
You have been managing a large mapmaking project for the government. Your customer is asking for multiple scope changes. You are considering these requested changes and trying to determine their true magnitudes. You are most likely to review what document?
You have spent months planning your project and you and your team are ready to begin execution. The direct and manage project work process includes implementing the project management plan and any approved changes made to the plan. Which of the following is not an input to direct and manage project work?
A major fire occurred in your community six months ago. A final report was developed that included many recommendations going forward. Your project is to ensure that all the approved recommendations occur in a timely fashion. Now another recommendation has been suggested. You realize that if approved this change will increase the project cost by $80,000. At this point you should:
The procurement professionals in your organization work in a centralized organization. A consultant has recommended that you move to decentralized contracting. All of the following are positives of decentralized contracting except:
Deviations from the project management plan may indicate:
Your organization has just won a large contract. Management has ordered work to begin immediately. For you, this means getting the project charter approved. Management tells you that there is no time for this. What should you do first?
When an organization identifies an opportunity to which it would like to respond, it often initiates a:
The cost of proposal preparation is normally billed as:
Based on the diagram below, the project is currently:
The theory that high levels of management trust in, confidence in, and commitment to workers leads to high levels of worker motivation and productivity is:
Your quality manager and operations manager are arguing about how much money should be spent on quality. The real question is how to define optimal quality. Marginal analysis states that optimal quality is reached when:
The performance measurements associated with your project are acceptable and remaining at a constant level, but your project seems completely out of control. The project CPI is 1.04 and the project SPI is 1.03. You have 405 team members in 30 different countries. You know that your focus should be on communications yet all of your time is spent managing changes. All of the changes are catching you by surprise. Your team is closing out phase four of an eight-phase project. One likely lesson learned will be that additional effort should have been placed on:
As a house builder, you often take on more work than you can handle. For years you have consistently completed homes behind schedule, but you continue to be profitable. Your current project is running 90 days late and the homebuyer states that she intends to pursue punitive damages. Punitive damages represent:
Herzberg's hygiene theory stresses:
On your factory floor work in progress occupies a large amount of space. Management has decided to try a pull system. In this system, workers do not automatically receive work in progress from a previous station but pull it when they need inventory. Another name for this system is:
Your manager has limited knowledge of project management but understands the basic idea that managing the critical path is important. You have one critical path on your project and seven near critical paths. Your manager has only had a basic course on project management and has never heard of the idea of a near critical path. You explain that, as the number of more near critical paths increases, which of the following also increases?
Your management is heavily involved in selecting where your project resources are to be concentrated and in, anticipating potential project issues and dealing with these issues before they can become critical. You remind your manager that, on a project, these type of roles are handled by:
A project manager has been managing a long term training project. The training is over, and she is trying to close out her project. The situation is not good. Although all requirements have been met, the customer is not satisfied. The customer states that the results of the training were not what they expected. One likely cause of this was:
A project manager has submitted several contested changes to the customer. These contested changes, often called claims or disputes, are impeding progress. The preferred method to settle claims and disputes is:
Your company, Hausmann Associates, is in the final stages of the design/build of a semiconductor factory for a major customer. At the last customer meeting, the company finance manager mentioned the possibility of building another factory in the near future. This is an opportunity your company wants. The most likely strategy you are to use to get this project is:
The theory that people choose behaviors that they believe will lead to desired rewards or outcomes is:
As the project manager of a small start-up company it is always important to carefully track your working capital. Working capital is defined as:
One of your project's key resources is being pulled away to a higher priority project. This resource is working on activity A on your project. Activity A has an early finish of 12 days and a late finish of 10 days. This means:
You are heavily involved in the sale of construction services to a large manufacturing firm. During the negotiation, your organization's contracts manager takes over the negotiation and pushes for the contract type to be cost plus percentage of cost (CPPC) instead of the originally planned cost plus fixed fee (CPFF). You realize that your contract's manager may be assuming:
You are the project manager for a large construction company. Risk management is a large part of what you manage. Your management instructs you to focus on the business risks and informs you they will focus on the pure risks. How is your organization most likely to deal with pure risks?
The control limits on a control chart provide us information on:
You have been placed in charge of a team comprised of very experienced members. The team has been very successful in the past. The leadership style you are least likely to adopt in this situation is:
The project is to transfer technology developed in your factory in Scotland to an operations facility in Chin
You are reviewing the latest data collected, in the form of a control chart, from a piece of equipment that cuts pipe. The process mean is a length of 42.35 meters. The upper control limit is 42.83 meters. The lower control limit is 41.87. The latest data in sequence is: 41.92, 42.38, 42.75, 42.32, 42.01, 41.97, 41.88, 42.30, 42.09, 41.95. From this data we can state:
The pessimistic time to complete Activity A is 22 days. The optimistic time is 10 days. The standard deviation for Activity A is:
You are managing multiple projects for your customer, the British Government. These contracts differ in type. Types include time and materials(T&M) and cost reimbursable (CR) contracts, as well as fixed price(FP) contracts. The corporate accountant calls you to state that you are about to hit your PTA (point of total assumption) on one of the contracts. The accountant is talking about which contract type?
The project sponsor has approached you with a dilemma. The CEO announced at the annual stockholders meeting that the project you're managing will be completed by the end of this year. The problem is that this is six months prior to the scheduled completion date. It's too late to go back and correct her mistake, and stockholders are expecting implementation by the announced date. You must speed up the delivery date of this project. Your primary constraint before this occurred was the budget. Choose the best action from the options listed to speed up the project.
These types of dependencies can create arbitrary total float values and limit your scheduling options.
Project managers spend what percentage of their time communicating?
Inspections are also called each of the following except for which one?
The primary function of the Closing processes is to perform which of the following?
During your project meeting, a problem was discussed, and a resolution to the problem was reached. During the meeting, the participants started wondering why they thought the problem was such a big issue. Sometime after the meeting, you received an email from one of the meeting participants saying they've changed their mind about the solution reached in the meeting and need to resurface the problem. The solution reached during the initial project meeting is a result of which of the following conflict resolution techniques?
What are decision models?
You've been assigned as a project manager on a research and development project for a new dental procedure. You're working in the Scope Management Knowledge Area. What is the purpose of the project scope management plan?
All of the following statements are true regarding Ishikawa diagrams in the Identify Risks process except which one?
All of the following are outputs of the Perform Integrated Change Control process except for which one?
What is one of the most important skills a project manager can have?
All of the following are a type of project ending except for which one?
You are the project manager for a construction company that is building a new city and county office building in your city. Your CCB recently approved a scope change. You know that scope change might come about as a result of all of the following except which one?
You are the project manger for Xylophone Phonics. It produces children's software programs that teach basic reading and math skills. You're performing cost estimates for your project and don't have a lot of details yet. Which of the following techniques should you use?
Project managers have the highest level of authority and the most power in which type of organizational structure?
This process is concerned with determining the information stakeholders will need throughout the project and the methods of communication.
All of the following statements are true regarding risk events except which one? Choose the least correct answer.
This process applies evaluation criteria to the bids and proposals received from potential vendors.
You are the project manger for Xylophone Phonics. This company produces children's software programs that teach basic reading and math skills. You are ready to assign project roles, responsibilities, and reporting relationships. Which project Planning process are you working on?
You know that PV = 470, AC = 430, EV = 480, EAC = 500, and BAC = 525. What is VAC?
You are a project manager who has recently held a project team kickoff meeting where all the team members were formally introduced to each other. Some of the team members know each other from other projects and have been working with you for the past three weeks. Which of the following statements is true?
You are a project manager for the Swirling Seas Cruises food division. You're considering two different projects regarding food services on the cruise lines. The initial cost of Project Fish'n for Chips will be $800,000, with expected cash inflows of $300,000 per quarter. Project Picnic's payback period is six months. Which project should you recommend?
Which of the following compression techniques increases risk?
Name the ethical code you'll be required to adhere to as a PMP.
You have been assigned to a project that will allow job seekers to fill out applications and submit them via the company website. You report to the VP of human resources. You are also responsible for screening applications for the information technology division and setting up interviews. The project coordinator has asked for the latest version of your changes to the online application page for his review. Which organizational structure do you work in?
You are the project manager for Lucky Stars Candies. You've identified the requirements for the project and documented them where?
What is the purpose of the project charter?
Which of the following are tools and techniques of the Identify Stakeholder process?
You are a project manager working on a software development project. You've developed the risk management plan, identified risks, and determined risk responses for the risks. A risk event occurs, and you implement the response. Then, another risk event occurs as a result of the response you implemented. What type of risk is this called?
You are working on a project that will upgrade the phone system in your customer service center. You have used analogous estimating, parametric estimating, bottom-up estimating, and three-point estimates to determine activity costs. Which process does this describe?
Failure costs are also known as which of the following?
Feeding buffers and the project buffer are part of which of the following Develop Schedule tool and technique?
You are working on a project that will upgrade the phone system in your customer service center. You have used bottom-up estimating techniques to assign costs to the project activities and have determined the cost performance baseline. Which of the following statements is true?
Each of the following statements describes an element of the Develop Project Management Plan process except for which one?
There are likely to be team loyalty issues in a matrixed environment. All of the following are true regarding this situation as it pertains to the Manage Project Team process except for which one?
Monte Carlo analysis can help predict the impact of risks on project deliverables. This is an element of one of the tools and techniques of which of the following processes?
All of the following statements are true regarding configuration management except which one?
Which performance measurement tells you what the projected total cost of the project will be at completion?
Which of the following contracts should you use for projects that have a degree of uncertainty and require a large investment early in the project life cycle?
According to the PMBOK(R) Guide, the project manager is identified and assigned during which process?
All of the following are tools and techniques of the Close Procurements process except for which one?
The inputs of the Report Performance process include all of the following except for which one?
All of the following statements are true regarding risks except for which one?
Which performance measurement tells you the cost of the work that has been authorized and budgeted for a WBS component?
Which of the following statements is true regarding the Project Management Knowledge Areas?
You have just prepared an RFP for release. Your project involves a substantial amount of contract work detailed in the RFP. Your favorite vendor drops by and offers to give you and your spouse the use of their company condo for your upcoming vacation. It's located in a beautiful resort community that happens to be one of your favorite places to go for a getaway. What is the most appropriate response?
What are the Define Scope process tools and techniques?
You are the project manager for Heartthrobs by the Numbers Dating Services. You're working on an updated Internet site that will display pictures as well as short bios of prospective heartbreakers. You have your activity list and resource requirements in hand and are planning to use parametric estimates and reserve analysis to determine activity durations. Which of the following statements is true?
Your team is developing the risk management plan. Which tool and technique of this process is used to develop risk cost elements and schedule activities that will be included in the project budget and schedule?
What type of organization experiences the least amount of stress during project closeout?
You are the project manager for Xylophone Phonics. It produces children's software programs that teach basic reading and math skills. You are performing the Plan Quality process and are identifying nonproductive activities. Part of this involves capturing information such as process boundaries, process configurations, and process metrics. Which of the following does this describe?
You need to convey some very complex, detailed information to the project stakeholders. What is the best method for communicating this kind of information?
You are the project manager for Heartthrobs by the Numbers Dating Services. You're working on an updated Internet site that will display pictures as well as short bios of prospective heartbreakers. You've just completed your project staff assignments and published the project team directory. Which process are you in?
You are a project manager for Waterways Houseboats, Inc. You've been asked to perform a cost-benefit analysis for two proposed projects. Project A costs $2.4 million, with potential benefits of $12 million and future operating costs of $3 million. Project B costs $2.8 million, with potential benefits of $14 million and future operating costs of $2 million. Which project should you recommend?
These diagrams rank-order factors for corrective action by frequency of occurrence. They are also a type of histogram.
You are a project manager working in a foreign country. You observe that some of your project team members are having a difficult time adjusting to the new culture. You provided them with training on cultural differences and the customs of this country before arriving, but they still seem uncomfortable and disoriented. Which of the following statements is true?
Your project involves the research and development of a new food additive. You're ready to release the product to your customer when you discover that a minor reaction might occur in people with certain conditions. The reactions to date have been very minor, and no known long-lasting side effects have been noted. As project manager, what should you do?
The project manager has the greatest influence over quality during which process?
You are the project manager for a construction company that is building a new city and county office building in your city. You recently looked over the construction site to determine whether the work to date was conforming to the requirements and quality standards. Which tool and technique of the Perform Quality Control process are you using?
All of the following statements are true of the project Closing processes except for which one?
You are refining the product description for your company's new line of ski boots. Which of the following statements is true?
Every status meeting should have time allotted for Risk Monitoring and Control. Which of the following sentences is not true?
The business need, product scope description, and strategic plan together describe elements of which of the following?
Which of the following statements is true regarding constraints and assumptions?
People are motivated by the need for achievement, power, or affiliation according to which theory?
As a result of a face-to-face meeting you recently had to discuss the items in your issue log, you have resolved issues and come away with an approved corrective action and an update to the project management plan. Which process does this describe?
You've just completed the WBS. Which of the following statements is true?
As a PMP, one of your responsibilities is to ensure integrity on the project. When your personal interests are put above the interests of the project or when you use your influence to cause others to make decisions in your favor without regard for the project outcome, this is considered which of the following?
Which of the following describes the Executing process group?
All of the following statements are true regarding the ADM method except which one?
Which organization has set the de facto standards for project management techniques?
The VP of marketing approaches you and requests that you change the visitor logon screen on the company's website to include a username with at least six characters. This is considered which of the following?
Your company manufactures small kitchen appliances. It is introducing a new product line of appliances in designer colors with distinctive features for kitchens in small spaces. These new products will be offered indefinitely starting with the spring catalog release. Which of the following is true?
Your company manufactures small kitchen appliances. It is introducing a new product line of appliances in designer colors with distinctive features for kitchens in small spaces. These new products will be offered indefinitely starting with the spring catalog release. To determine the characteristics and features of the new product line, you will have to perform which of the following?
A project is considered successful when ___________________ .
The VP of customer service has expressed concern over a project in which you're involved. His specific concern is that if the project is implemented as planned, he'll have to purchase additional equipment to staff his customer service center. The cost was not taken into consideration in the project budget. The project sponsor insists that the project must go forward as originally planned or the customer will suffer. Which of the following is true?
Which of the following applies a set of tools and techniques used to describe, organize, and monitor the work of project activities to meet the project requirements?
All of the following are true regarding phase-to-phase relationships except for which one?
All of the following statements are true except for which one?
You are the project manager for a large construction project. The project objective is to construct a set of outbuildings to house the Olympic support team that will be arriving in your city 18 months from the project start date. Resources are not readily available because they are currently assigned to other projects. Jack, an expert crane operator, is needed for this project two months from today. Which of the following skills will you use to get Jack assigned to your project?
You've decided to try your hand at project management in the entertainment industry. You're working on a movie production and the phases are performed sequentially. The team has just completed the storyboard phase of the project. Which of the following is true?
You are managing a project to install a new postage software system that will automatically print labels and administer postage for certified mailings, overnight packages, and other special mailing needs. You've attempted to gain the cooperation of the business analyst working on this project, and you need some answers. She is elusive and tells you that this project is not her top priority. What should you do to avoid situations like this in the future?
The amount of authority a project manager possesses can be related to which of the following?
What is one of the advantages of a functional organization?
You have been assigned to a project in which the objectives are to direct customer calls to an interactive voice response system before being connected to a live agent. You are in charge of the media communications for this project. You report to the project manager in charge of this project and the VP of marketing, who share responsibility for this project. Which organizational structure do you work in?
You have been assigned to a project in which the objectives are to expand three miles of the north-to-south highway through your city by two lanes in each direction. You are in charge of the demolition phase of this project, and you report to the project manager in charge of this project. You have been hired on contract and will be released at the completion of the demolition phase. What type of organizational structure does this represent?
What are the five project management process groups, in order?
You have been assigned to a project in which the objectives are to expand three miles of the north-to-south highway through your city by two lanes in each direction. You are interested in implementing a new project process called Design-Build in order to speed up the project schedule. The idea is that the construction team will work on the first mile of the highway reconstruction at the same time the design team is coming up with plans for the third mile of the reconstruction rather than completing all design before any construction begins. This is an example of which of the following?
During which project management process group are risk and stakeholder's ability to influence project outcomes the highest at the beginning of the process?
You are a project manager working on gathering requirements and establishing estimates for the project. Which process group are you in?
When a project is being performed under contract, the SOW is provided by which of the following?
You've been hired as a manager for the adjustments department of a nationwide bank based in your city. The adjustments department is responsible for making corrections to customer accounts. This is a large department, with several smaller sections that deal with specific accounts, such as personal checking or commercial checking. You've received your first set of management reports and can't make heads or tails of the information. Each section appears to use a different methodology to audit their work and record the data for the management report. You request that a project manager from the PMO comes down and get started right away on a project to streamline this process and make the data and reports consistent. This project came about as a result of which of the following?
What are the inputs to the Develop Project Charter process?
You work for a large manufacturing plant. Your firm is thinking of initiating a new project to release an overseas product line. This is the company's first experience in the overseas market, and it wants to make a big splash with the introduction of this product. The project entails producing your product in a concentrated formula and packaging it in smaller containers than the U.S. product uses. A new machine is needed in order to mix the first set of ingredients in the concentrated formula. Which of the following actions is the next best step the project manager should take?
You are the project manager for Fun Days Vacation Resorts. Your new project assignment is to head up the Fun Days resort opening in Austin, Texas. You are estimating the duration of the project plan activities, devising the project schedule, and monitoring and controlling deviations from the schedule. Which of the Project Management Knowledge Areas are you working in?
According to the PMBOK(R) Guide, the project statement of work should contain or reference which of the following elements?
Your nonprofit organization is preparing to host its first annual 5K run/walk in City Park. You worked on a similar project for the organization two years ago when it cohosted the 10K run through Overland Pass. Which of the organizational process assets might be most helpful to you on your new project?
Which of the following lists of processes belong to The Project Integration Management Knowledge Area?
Comparative methods, scoring methods, and economic and cash flow analysis are all part of which of the following?
You are the project manager for the Late Night Smooth Jazz Club chain, with stores in 12 states. Smooth Jazz is considering opening a new club in Arizona or Nevada. You have derived the following information: Project Arizona: The payback period is 18 months, and the NPV is (250). Project Nevada: The payback period is 24 months, and the NPV is 300. Which project would you recommend to the selection committee?
You are the project manager for the Late Night Smooth Jazz Club chain, with stores in 12 states. Smooth Jazz is considering opening a new club in Kansas City or Spokane. You have derived the following information: Project Kansas City: The payback period is 27 months, and the IRR is 6 percent. Project Spokane: The payback period is 25 months, and the IRR is 5 percent. Which project should you recommend to the selection committee?
Which of the following is true regarding NPV?
You are the project manager for Insomniacs International. Since you don't sleep much, you get a lot of project work done. You're considering recommending a project that costs $575,000; expected inflows are $25,000 per quarter for the first two years and then $75,000 per quarter thereafter. What is the payback period?
Which of the following is true regarding IRR?
Mathematical models using linear, dynamic, integer, or algorithm models are considered ___________________ .
Your project selection committee used a weighted scoring model and found that Project B, with a score of 54, should be chosen over the other competing projects. Which of the following is true?
Your selection committee is debating between two projects. Project A has a payback period of 18 months. Project B has a cost of $125,000, with expected cash inflows of $50,000 the first year and $25,000 per quarter after that. Which project should you recommend?
Which of the following is true?
You are a project manager for Zippy Tees. Your selection committee has just chosen a project you recommended for implementation. Your project is to manufacture a line of miniature stuffed bears that will be attached to your company's trendy T-shirts. The bears will be wearing the same T-shirt design as the shirt to which they're attached. Your project sponsor thinks you've really impressed the big boss and wants you to skip to the manufacturing process right away. What is your response?
Which of the following is true regarding the project charter?
You are a project manager for Laredo Pioneer's Traveling Rodeo Show. You're heading up a project to promote a new line of souvenirs to be sold at the shows. You are getting ready to write the project management plan and know that all the following are true regarding the PMIS except for one. Which of the following is not true?
You are a project manager responsible for the construction of a new office complex. You are taking over for a project manager who recently left the company. The prior project manager completed the scope statement and scope management plan for this project. In your interviews with some key team members, you conclude which of the following?
Unanimity, majority, plurality, and dictatorship are four examples of which of the following techniques?
Which of the following is true regarding the project scope statement?
You are a project manager for an agricultural supply company. You have interviewed stakeholders and gathered requirements. Which of the following is true regarding the process this question refers to?
Which of the following makes up the project scope baseline?
Which of the following statements is true regarding brainstorming and lateral thinking?
Your company, Kick That Ball Sports, has appointed you project manager for its new Cricket product line introduction. This is a national effort, and all the retail stores across the country need to have the new products on the shelves before the media advertising blitz begins. The product line involves three new products, two of which will be introduced together and a third one that will follow within two years. You are ready to create the WBS. All of the following are true except for which one?
You are a project manager for Giraffe Enterprises. You've recently taken over for a project manager who lied about his PMI certification and was subsequently fired. Unfortunately, he did a poor job of defining the scope. Which of the following could happen if you don't correct this?
You are the project manager for Lucky Stars nightclubs. They specialize in live country and western band performances. Your newest project is in the Planning processes group. You are working on the WBS. The finance manager has given you a numbering system to assign to the WBS. Which of the following is true?
You've constructed the WBS for your recent project. You've requested that the subproject managers report to you in three weeks with each of their individual WBSs constructed. Which statement is not true regarding the subproject managers' WBS?
You are a project manager working on a new software product your company plans to market to businesses. The project sponsor told you that the project must be completed by September 1. The company plans to demo the new software product at a trade show in late September and therefore needs the project completed in time for the trade show. However, the sponsor has also told you that the budget is fixed at $85,000, and it would take an act of Congress to get it increased. You must complete the project within the given time frame and budget. Which of the following is the primary constraint for this project?
Which of the following statements about decomposition is the least true?
You are in the process of translating project objectives into tangible deliverables and requirements. All the following are techniques used in the product analysis tool and technique of the Define Scope process except for which one?
You are a project manager for a documentary film company. In light of a recent regional tragedy, the company president wants to get a new documentary on the efforts of the heroic rescue teams to air as soon as possible. She's looking to you to make this documentary the best that has ever been produced in the history of this company. She guarantees you free rein to use whatever resources you need to get this project done quickly. However, the best photographer in the company is currently working on another assignment. Which of the following is true?
Your project depends on a key deliverable from a vendor you've used several times before with great success. You're counting on the delivery to arrive on June 1. This is an example of a/an ___________________ .
What limits the options of the project team?
Your company provides answering services for several major catalog retailers. The number of calls coming into the service center per month has continued to increase over the past 18 months. The phone system is approaching the maximum load limits and needs to be upgraded. You've been assigned to head up the upgrade project. Based on the company's experience with the vendor who worked on the last phone upgrade project, you're confident they'll be able to assist you with this project as well. Which of the following is true?
Which of the following is not a major step of decomposition?
You are the project manager for Changing Tides video games. You have gathered the inputs for the Estimate Activity Durations process. Which of the following tools and techniques will you employ to produce the outputs for this process?
You are the project manager for Changing Tides video games. You have produced a project schedule network diagram and have updated the activity list. Which process have you just finished?
Your project's primary constraint is quality. To make certain the project team members don't feel too pressed for time and to avoid schedule risk, you decide to use which of the following activity estimating tools?
You have been hired as a contract project manger for Grapevine Vineyards. Grapevine wants you to design an Internet wine club for its customers. One of the activities for this project is the installation and testing of several new servers. You know from past experience it takes about 16 hours per server to accomplish this task. Since you're installing 10 new servers, you estimate this activity to take 160 hours. Which of the estimating techniques have you used?
All of the following statements describe the activity list except which one?
You have been hired as a contract project manager for Grapevine Vineyards. Grapevine wants you to design an Internet wine club for its customers. Customers must register before being allowed to order wine over the Internet so that legal age can be established. You know that the module to verify registration must be written and tested using data from Grapevine's existing database. This new module cannot be tested until the data from the existing system is loaded. This is an example of which of the following?
You are the project manager for Design Your Web Site, Inc. Your company is designing the website for a national grocery store chain. You have your activity list in hand and are ready to diagram the activity dependencies using the PDM technique. Which of the following statements is true?
You are working on a project that requires resources with expertise in the areas of hospitality management and entertainment. You are preparing your project schedule network diagram and know that you will use only finish-to-start dependencies. Which of the following diagramming methods does this describe?
Which logical relationship does the PDM use most often?
You are a project manager for Picture Shades, Inc. It manufactures window shades that have replicas of Renaissance-era paintings for hotel chains. Picture Shades is taking its product to the home market, and you're managing the new project. It will offer its products at retail stores as well as on its website. You're developing the project schedule for this undertaking and have determined the critical path. Which of the following statements is true?
You are a project manager for Picture Shades, Inc. It manufactures window shades that have replicas of Renaissance-era paintings for hotel chains. Picture Shades is taking its product to the home market, and you're managing the new project. It will offer its products at retail stores as well as on its website. You're developing the project schedule for this undertaking. Looking at the following graph, which path is the critical path? 7 5 B C 10 14 2 8 A D E H 7 6 F G
Use the following graphic to answer this question. If the duration of activity B was changed to 10 days and the duration of activity G was changed to 9 days, which path is the critical path? 7 5 B C 10 14 2 8 A D E H 7 6 F G
Which of the following statements is true regarding the critical path?
You are a project manager for Move It Now trucking company. Your company specializes in moving household goods across the city or across the country. Your project involves upgrading the nationwide computer network for the company. Your lead engineer has given you the following estimates for a critical path activity: 60 days most likely, 72 days pessimistic, 48 days optimistic. What is the weighted average or expected value?
You are a project manager for Move It Now trucking company. Your company specializes in moving household goods across the city or across the country. Your project involves upgrading the nationwide computer network for the company. Your lead engineer has given you the following estimates for a critical path activity: 60 days most likely, 72 days pessimistic, 48 days optimistic. What is the standard deviation?
If you know the expected value is 500 and the standard deviation is 12, you can say with approximately a 95 percent confidence rating which of the following?
If your expected value is 110 and the standard deviation is 12, which of the following is true?
You are the project manager working on a research project for a new drug treatment. Your preliminary project schedule runs past the due date for a federal grant application. The manager of the R&D department has agreed to release two resources to work on your project in order to meet the federal grant application date. This is an example of ___________________.
You are the project manager for Rivera Gourmet Adventure Vacations. Rivera combines the wonderful tastes of great gourmet food with outdoor adventure activities. Your project involves installing a new human resources software system. Jason, the database analyst working on this project, is overallocated. Which of the following statements is true?
What is one of the problems with project management software?
All of the following are true regarding the Project Cost Management Knowledge Area processes except for which one? (Choose the least correct answer.)
This document is used to establish the criteria for planning, estimating, budgeting, and controlling costs.
You are a project manager working for iTrim Central and you're preparing your cost management plan. You know that all of the following are true regarding this plan except for which one?
You are a project manager working for iTrim Central. Your organization has developed a new dieting technique that is sure to be the next craze. One of the deliverables of your feasibility study was an analysis of the potential financial performance of this new product and your executives are very pleased with the numbers. You will be working with several vendors to produce products, marketing campaigns, and software that will track customers' progress with the new techniques. For purposes of performing earned value measurements for project costs, you are going to place which of the following in the WBS?
All of the following are inputs of the Estimate Costs process except for which one?
You want to improve your activity cost estimates by taking into account estimation uncertainty and risk. Which of the following tools and techniques will you use?
You have received estimates for activity costs associated with one work package of the WBS. Additional contingencies have been added to the estimates to account for cost uncertainty. Which of the following tools and techniques of Estimate Costs does this describe?
You have received the following estimates for a complex activity that is critical to the success of your project. The most likely estimate is $42, the optimistic estimate is $35, and the pessimistic estimate is $54. What is the expected activity cost of this activity (rounded to the nearest dollar)?
You are the project manager for a custom home-building construction company. You are working on the model home project for the upcoming Show Homes Tour. The model home includes Internet connections in every room, talking appliances, and wiring for home theaters. You are working on the cost performance baseline for this project. All of the following statements are true except which one?
Your project sponsor has requested a cost estimate for the project. She would like the cost estimate to be as accurate as possible because this might be her one and only chance to secure the budget for this project because of recent cuts in special projects. You decide to use _______________.
You are the project manager for a custom home-building construction company. You are working on the model home project for the upcoming Show Homes Tour. The model home includes Internet connections in every room, talking appliances, and wiring for home theaters. You are working on the Determine Budget process. All of the following statements are true except which one?
Which of the following is displayed as an S curve?
All of the following are tools and techniques of the Determine Budget process except for which one?
Your project sponsor has requested a cost estimate for the project on which you're working. This project is similar in scope to a project you worked on last year. She would like to get the cost estimates as soon as possible. Accuracy is not her primary concern right now. She needs a ballpark figure by tomorrow. You decide to use ___________________.
You have eight key stakeholders to communicate with on your project. Which of the following is true?
All of the following are true regarding Plan Communications except for which one?
You are preparing your communications management plan and know that all of the following are true except for which one? (Choose the least correct response.)
This ensures that information is distributed but does not acknowledge or certify that it was understood by intended receiver(s).
You need to communicate information in a multidirectional fashion with several stakeholders. Which of the following is true?
Communication technology takes into account all of the following factors that can affect the project except for which one?
You are a project manager for Fountain of Youth Spring Water bottlers. Your project involves installing a new accounting system, and you're performing the risk-planning processes. You have identified several problems along with the causes of those problems. Which of the following diagrams will you use to show the problem and its causes and effects?
Assessing the probability and consequences of identified risks to the project objectives, assigning a risk score to each risk, and creating a list of prioritized risks describes which of the following processes?
Each of the following statements is true regarding the risk management plan except for which one?
You are using the interviewing technique of the Perform Quantitative Risk Analysis process. You intend to use normal and lognormal distributions. All of the following statements are true regarding this question except which one?
The information-gathering techniques used in the Identify Risks process include all of the following except ___________________.
Which of the following processes assesses the likelihood of risk occurrences and their consequences using a numerical rating?
You are the project manager for a new website for the local zoo. You need to perform the Perform Qualitative Risk Analysis process. When you've completed this process, you'll produce all of the following as part of the risk register update output except which one?
You've identified a risk event on your current project that could save $100,000 in project costs if it occurs. Which of the following is true based on this statement? (Choose the best answer.)
You've identified a risk event on your current project that could save $500,000 in project costs if it occurs. Your organization is considering hiring a consulting firm to help establish proper project management techniques in order to assure it realizes these savings. Which of the following is true based on this statement? (Choose the best answer.)
Your hardware vendor left you a voicemail saying that a snowstorm in the Midwest might prevent your equipment from arriving on time. She wanted to give you a heads-up and asked that you return the call. Which of the following statements is true? (Choose the best answer.)
You are constructing a probability and impact matrix for your project. Which of the following statements is true?
Your stakeholders have asked for an analysis of the cost risk. All of the following are true except for which one?
Your hardware vendor left you a voicemail saying that a snowstorm in the Midwest will prevent your equipment from arriving on time. You identified a risk response strategy for this risk and have arranged for a local company to lease you the needed equipment until yours arrives. This is an example of which risk response strategy?
All of the following are elements of the enterprise environmental factors input of the Identify Risks process that you should evaluate except for which one?
You work for a large manufacturing plant. You are working on a new project to release an overseas product line. This is the company's first experience in the overseas market, and it wants to make a big splash with the introduction of this product. The stakeholders are a bit nervous about the project and historically proceed cautiously and take a considerable amount of time to examine information before making a final decision. The project entails producing your product in a concentrated formula and packaging it in smaller containers than the U.S. product uses. A new machine is needed in order to mix the ingredients into a concentrated formula. After speaking with one of your stakeholders, you discover this will be the first machine your organization has purchased from your new supplier. Which of the following statements is true given the information in this question?
Your project team has identified several potential risks on your current project that could have a significant impact if they occurred. The team examined the impact of the risks by keeping all the uncertain elements at their baseline values. What type of diagram will the team use to display this information?
Your project team is in the process of identifying project risks on your current project. The team has the option to use all of the following tools and techniques to diagram some of these potential risks except for which one?
All of the following statements are true regarding the RBS except for which one?
Your team has identified the risks on the project and determined their risk score. The team is in the midst of determining what strategies to put in place should the risks occur. After some discussion, the team members have determined that the risk of losing their network administrator is a risk they'll just deal with if and when it occurs. Although they think it's a possibility and the impact would be significant, they've decided to simply deal with it after the fact. Which of the following is true regarding this question?
All of the following are true regarding the Perform Qualitative Risk Analysis process except which one?
You are the project manager for an upcoming outdoor concert event. You're working on the procurement plan for the computer software program that will control the lighting and screen projections during the concert. You're comparing the cost of purchasing a software product to the cost of your company programmers writing a custom software program. You are engaged in which of the following?
You are the project manager for an outdoor concert event scheduled for one year from today. You're working on the procurement documents for the computer software program that will control the lighting and screen projections during the concert. You've decided to contract with a professional services company that specializes in writing custom software programs. You want to minimize the risk to the organization, so you'll opt for which contract type?
You are the project manager for the Heart of Texas casual clothing company. It's introducing a new line of clothing called Black Sheep Ranch Wear. You will outsource the production of this clothing line to a vendor. The vendor has requested a procurement SOW. All of the following statements are true except for which one?
You are the project manager for the Heart of Texas casual clothing company. It's introducing a new line of clothing called Black Sheep Ranch Wear. You will outsource the production of this clothing line to a vendor. Your legal department has recommended you use a contract that reimburses the seller's allowable costs and builds in a bonus based on the vendor achieving the performance criteria they've outlined in their memo. Which of the following contract types will you use?
All of the following statements are true regarding the Develop Human Resource Plan process except for which one?
Sally is a project manager working on a project that will require a specially engineered machine. Only three manufacturers can make the machine to the specifications Sally needs. The price of this machine is particularly critical to this project. The budget is limited, and there's no chance of securing additional funds if the bids for the machine come in higher than budgeted. She's developing the source selection criteria for the bidders' responses and knows all of the following are true except for which one?
Which of the following are constraints that you might find during the Develop Human Resource Plan process?
You have been hired as a contract project manager for Grapevine Vineyards. Grapevine wants you to design an Internet wine club for its customers. Customers must register before being allowed to order wine over the Internet so that legal age can be established. You know this project will require new hardware and an update to some existing infrastructure. You will have to hire an expert to help with the infrastructure assessment and upgrades. You also know that the module to verify registration must be written and tested using data from Grapevine's existing database. This new module cannot be tested until the data from the existing system is loaded. You are going to hire a vendor to perform the programming and testing tasks for this module to help speed up the project schedule. The vendor will be reimbursed for all their costs and you want to use a contract type that will allow you to give the vendor a little something extra if you are satisfied with the work they do. You know all of the following apply in this situation except for which one? Choose the least correct response.
You are the project manager for BB Tops, a nationwide toy store chain. Your new project involves creating a prototype display at several stores across the country. You are using a RACI chart to display individuals and activities. What does RACI stand for?
This process has the greatest ability to directly influence the project schedule.
You are the project manager for BB Tops, a nationwide toy store chain. Your new project involves creating a prototype display at several stores across the country. You are hiring a contractor for portions of the project. The contract stipulates that you'll pay all allowable costs and a 6 percent fee over and above the allowable costs at the end of the contract. Which of the following describes this contract type?
All of the following are true regarding the Plan Quality process except for which one?
Four people are responsible for establishing cost of quality theories. Crosby and Juran are two them, and their theories are ___________________, respectively.
The theory that 85 percent of the cost of quality is a management problem is attributed to ___________________?
All of the following are benefits of meeting quality requirements except which one?
Which of the following describes the cost of quality associated with scrapping, rework, and downtime?
The quality management plan documents how the project team will implement the quality policy. It must address at least all of the following except which one?
You work for a furniture manufacturer. Your project is going to design and produce a new office chair. The chair will have the ability to function as a regular chair and also the ability to transform its occupant into an upright, kneeling position. The design team is trying to determine the combination of comfort and ease of transformation to the new position that will give the chair the best characteristics while keeping the costs reasonable. Several different combinations have been tested. This is an example of which of the following tools and techniques of Plan Quality?
Which of the following best characterizes Six Sigma?
Your organization is embarking on a long-term project that will require additional human resources on a contract basis to complete the work of the project. Since the project will span several years, you know one vendor probably can't supply all the resources you'll need over the course of the contract. However, you only want to work with one vendor throughout the project to minimize the amount of procurement documents you'll have to produce. So you'll specify in your procurement documents that contractors will have to form partnerships to work on this project. You know all of the following are true regarding this question except for which one?
You are a project manager for a growing dairy farm. It offers its organic dairy products regionally and is expanding its operations to the West Coast. It is in the process of purchasing and leasing dairy farms to get operations underway. You are in charge of the network operations part of this project. An important deadline is approaching that depends on the successful completion of the testing phase. You've detected some problems with your hardware in the testing phase and discover that the hardware is not compatible with other network equipment. You take corrective action and exchange the hardware for more compatible equipment. Which of the following statements is true?
You are a project manager for a growing dairy farm. It offers its organic dairy products regionally and is expanding its operations to the West Coast. It's in the process of purchasing and leasing dairy farms to get operations underway. The subproject manager in charge of network operations has reported some hardware problems to you. You're also having some other problems coordinating and integrating other elements of the project. Which of the following statements is true?
Which of the following processes serve as inputs to each other?
Your team members have just completed training on specialized equipment. This is one of the work results you've gathered and recorded. Which of the following outputs of the Direct and Manage Project Execution process does this describe?
You are reporting on project elements such as schedule status, deliverables completion, lessons learned, and resource utilization. Which of the following outputs of the Direct and Manage Project Execution does this describe?
You are in the process of making project staff assignments. You have several candidates for a position on the project team that requires specific qualifications. All the candidates seem to meet the qualifications. You also consider prior experience, their interest in the project, cost rates, and availability of these potential candidates. Which of the following is true?
During a recent team meeting, you reached a resolution to a problem that's been troubling the team for several weeks. It turned out that there was a problem with one of the manufactured parts required for the project. Once this was corrected, the remaining production run went off without a hitch. You took responsibility for searching out the facts of this problem and implemented a change request to resolve the issue. Which of the following is true regarding this question? Choose the best response.
You are the project manager for a cable service provider. Your team members are amiable with each other and are careful to make project decisions jointly. Which of the following statements is true?
You are the project manager for a cable service provider. Your project team is researching a new service offering. They have been working together for quite some time and are in the performing stage of team development. A new member has been introduced to the team. Which of the following statements is true?
You are the project manager for a cable service provider. Your project team is researching a new service offering. They have been working together for quite some time and are in the performing stage of team development. This stage of team development is similar to which of the following?
You've promised your team two days of paid time off plus a week's training in the latest technology of their choice if they complete their project ahead of schedule. This is an example of which of the following?
Your team is split between two buildings on either side of town. As a result, the team isn't very cohesive because the members don't know each other very well. The team is still in the storming stage because of the separation issues. Which of the following should you consider?
Which conflict resolution technique offers project managers the best option for resolution?
You are a fabulous project manager, and your team thinks highly of you. You are well respected by the stakeholders, management team, and project team. When you make decisions, others follow your lead as a result of which of the following?
Theory Y managers believe which of the following?
When working in a matrix environment, all of the following are true regarding the Manage Project Team process except for which one? Choose the least correct response.
You are preparing project performance appraisals and have decided you'd like each team member to get feedback regarding their performance from several sources, including peers, superiors, and subordinates. Which of the following is true?
Specific team members were promised for your project as part of the project proposal. You speak with the functional managers to assure their availability. All of the following are true regarding this question except for which one?
These two conflict resolution techniques are known as lose-lose techniques.
You are a project manager who believes people will have high productivity, morale, and satisfaction if offered a job for life. Which theory do you subscribe to?
You have been hired as a contract project manager for Grapevine Vineyards. Grapevine wants you to design an Internet wine club for its customers. Customers must register before being allowed to order wine over the Internet so that legal age can be established. You know that the module to verify registration must be written and tested using data from Grapevine's existing database. This new module cannot be tested until the data from the existing system is loaded. You are going to hire a vendor to perform the programming and testing tasks for this module to help speed up the project schedule. You decide to use an IFB and include a detailed SOW. This is an example of which of the following?
Receivers in the communication model filter their information through all of the following except ___________________.
You have accumulated project information throughout the project and need to distribute some important information you just received. Which of the following is not an information distribution tool?
You know that the next status meeting will require some discussion and a decision for a problem that has surfaced on the project. To make the most accurate decision, you know that the number of participants in the meeting should be limited to ___________________.
You are holding end-of-phase meetings with your team members and key stakeholders to learn what has hindered and helped the project team's performance of the work. All of the following are true regarding this situation except for which one? Choose the least correct answer.
You are a project manager for Dakota Software Consulting Services. You're working with a major retailer that offers its products through mail-order catalogs. The company is interested in knowing customer characteristics, the amounts of first-time orders, and similar information. As a potential bidder for this project, you worked on the RFP response and submitted the proposal. When the selection committee received the RFP responses from all the vendors bidding on this project, they used a weighted system to make a selection. Which tool and technique is this a part of?
You have been asked to submit a proposal for a project that has been put out for bid. First you attend the bidder conference to ask questions of the buyers and to hear the questions some of the other bidders will ask. Which of the following statements is true?
You have been asked to submit a proposal for a project that has been put out for bid. Prior to submitting the proposal, your company must register so that its firm is on the qualified seller list. Which of the following statements is true?
Which of the following tools and techniques of the Conduct Procurements process is used to check proposed pricing?
During the opening rounds of contract negotiation, the other party uses a fait accompli tactic. Which of the following statements is true about fait accompli tactics?
The tools and techniques of the Conduct Procurements process include all of the following except which one?
The purpose of a quality audit includes all of the following except which one?
You are a contract project manager for a wholesale flower distribution company. Your project involves developing a website for the company that allows retailers to place their flower orders online. You will also provide a separate link for individual purchases that are ordered, packaged, and mailed to the consumer directly from the grower's site. This project involves coordinating the parent company, growers, and distributors. You've discovered a problem with one of the technical processes needed to perform this project. You decide to perform root cause analysis to determine the cause of this problem and recommended preventive actions. Which of the following is true? Choose the most correct response.
The tools and techniques of the Perform Quality Assurance process include all of the following except which one?
You are working on a project and discover that one of the business users responsible for testing the product never completed this activity. She has written an email requesting that one of your team members drop everything to assist her with a problem that could have been avoided if she would have performed the test. This employee reports to a stakeholder, not to the project team. All project team members and stakeholders are co-located. Since your team needs her to also participate in an upcoming test, you decide to do which of the following?
Your project is progressing as planned. The project team has come up with a demo that the sales team will use when making presentations to prospective clients. You will do which of the following at your next stakeholder project status meeting?
Negotiated contracts that will be used as the final contract are a requirement of which of the following outputs of the Conduct Procurements process?
According to the PMBOK(R) Guide, this party is responsible for managing stakeholder expectations.
This activity can become its own process with inputs and outputs on large or complex projects.
Which of the following statement is true regarding contract life cycles?
You are a project manager for an international marketing firm. You are ready to assign resources to your new project using a work authorization system. Which of the following statements is not true?
You are working on a project and discover that one of the business users responsible for testing the product never completed this activity. She has written an email requesting that one of your team members drop everything to assist her with a problem that could have been avoided if she would have performed the test. This employee reports to a stakeholder, not to the project team. You estimate that the project might not be completed on time as a result of this missed activity. All of the following are true except for which one?
Which one of the following is the most preferred method of settling claims and disputes according to the PMBOK(R) Guide?
Which option includes all of the tools and techniques of the Administer Procurements process?
You are a project manager for an engineering company. Your company won the bid to add ramp-metering lights to several on-ramps along a stretch of highway at the south end of the city. You subcontracted a portion of the project to another company. The subcontractor's work involves digging the holes and setting the lamp poles in concrete. The subcontractor's performance is not meeting the contract requirements. Which of the following is not a valid option?
The Administer Procurements process is closely integrated with all of the following processes except for which one?
You are holding a regularly scheduled status meeting for your project. You know all of the following are true regarding status meetings except which one?
You are performing actions such as analyzing past performance, assessing the current status of risks and issues, describing the work completed this period, and summarizing the changes approved this period. Which process are you performing?
All of the following are tools and techniques of the Report Performance process except which one?
The Delphi method, technology forecasting, and forecast by analogy are examples of what category of forecasting methods?
Your project is progressing as planned. The project team has come up with a demo that the sales team will use when making presentations to prospective clients. You will do which of the following at your next stakeholder project status meeting? Choose the best answer.
All of the following statements are true regarding forecasting except which one?
You are a project manager for Bluebird Technologies. Bluebird writes custom billing applications for several industries. A schedule change has been requested. You know change from the perspective of the Perform Integrated Change Control is concerned with all of the following except which one?
You are a project manager for Bluebird Technologies. Bluebird writes custom billing applications for several industries. One of your users verbally requests changes to one of the screen displays. You explain to her that the change needs to go through the change control system, which is a subset of the configuration management system. You explain that a change control system does all of the following except for which one?
You are a project manager for Star Light Strings. Star Light manufactures strings of lights for outdoor display. Its products range from simple light strings to elaborate lights with animal designs, bug designs, memorabilia, and so on. Your newest project requires a change. You have documented the characteristics of the product and its functionality using which of the following tools and techniques?
You are a project manager for Star Light Strings. Star Light manufactures strings of lights for outdoor display. Its products range from simple light strings to elaborate lights with animal designs, bug designs, memorabilia, and so on. Your newest project requires a change. One of the business unit managers submitted a change through the change control system, which utilizes a CCB. Which of the following is true regarding the CCB?
All of the following are activities of the configuration management system except for which one?
According the PMBOK(R) Guide, this system centrally manages approved changes and baselines within a project.
You are performing the following activities: comparing actual performance against the project plan, assessing performance to determine if a corrective action is necessary, identifying new risks, providing forecasts to update current cost and schedule data, and monitoring implementation of approved changes. Which process are you in?
All of the following are acronyms for other boards that fulfill the same responsibilities as a change control board except for which one?
You are working on a project that was proceeding well until a manufacturing glitch occurred that requires corrective action. It turns out the glitch was an unintentional enhancement to the product, and the marketing people are absolutely crazy about its potential. The corrective action is canceled, and you continue to produce the product with the newly discovered enhancement. As the project manager, you know that a change has occurred to the product scope because the glitch changed the characteristics of the product. Which of the following statements is true?
You are working on a project that was proceeding well until a manufacturing glitch occurred that requires corrective action. It turns out the glitch was an unintentional enhancement to the product, and the marketing people are absolutely crazy about its potential. The corrective action is canceled, and you continue to produce the product with the newly discovered enhancement. As the project manager, you know that a variance has occurred. Which of the following is true?
Your project has experienced some changes to the agreed-upon WBS elements. The changes were approved through the proper change control process. The WBS changes might in turn require which of the following? Choose the best answer.
You are a project manager for Dakota Software Consulting Services. You're working with a major retailer that offers its products through mail-order catalogs. It is interested in knowing customer characteristics, the amounts of first-time orders, and similar information. The stakeholders have accepted the project scope. Work has begun on the project, and you're confirming some of the initial work results with the stakeholders. You've asked for acceptance of the work results. Which process are you in?
You are the project manager for a top-secret software project for an agency of the United States government. Your mission--should you choose to accept it--is to complete the project using internal resources. The reason is that getting top-secret clearances for contractors takes quite a bit of time and waiting for clearances would jeopardize the implementation date. Your programmers are 80 percent of the way through the programming and testing work when your agency appoints a new executive director. Your programmers are siphoned off this project to work on the executive director's hot new project. Which of the following addresses the purpose of Verify Scope in this case?
Which of the following statements is true regarding schedule variances?
You are a project manager for Laurel's Theater Productions. Your new project is coming in over budget and requires a cost change through the cost change control system. You know all of the following statements are true regarding Control Costs except for which one?
Which of the following might require rebaselining of the cost baseline?
What are the performance measurements for the Control Schedule process?
This measurement is the value of the work that has been completed to date compared to the budget.
You are a contract project manager for a wholesale flower distribution company. Your project is to develop a website for the company that allows retailers to place their flower orders online. You will also provide a separate link for individual purchases that are ordered, packaged, and mailed to the consumer directly from the grower's site. This project involves coordinating the parent company, growers, and distributors. You are preparing a performance review and have the following measurements at hand: PV = 300, AC = 200, and EV = 250. What do you know about this project?
A negative result from an SV calculation means which of the following?
You are a contract project manager for a wholesale flower distribution company. Your project is to develop a website for the company that allows retailers to place their flower orders online. You will also provide a separate link for individual purchases that are ordered, packaged, and mailed to the consumer directly from the grower's site. This project involves coordinating the parent company, growers, and distributors. You are preparing a performance review and have the following measurements at hand: PV = 300, AC = 200, and EV = 250. What is the CPI of this project?
You accept project costs to date and assume future work (ETC) will be performed at the budgeted rate. If BAC = 800, ETC = 275, PV = 300, AC = 200, EV = 250, and cumulative CPI = 1.25, what is the EAC?
You know that BAC = 375, PV = 300, AC = 200, and cumulative EV = 250. Variances that have occurred on the project to date are not expected to continue. What is the ETC?
You expect future project performance to be consistent with the project performance experienced to date. If BAC = 800, ETC = 275, PV = 300, cumulative AC = 200, EV = 250, and cumulative CPI = 1.25, what is the EAC?
You know that BAC = 500, PV = 325, AC = 275, CPI = .9, and EV = 250, and you are using actual costs to date and assuming ETC uses the budgeted rate. Variance at completion tells you which of the following?
You know that BAC = 500, PV = 325, cumulative AC = 275, and cumulative EV = 250 and that you are experiencing typical variances. What is ETC?
Your project progressed as planned up until yesterday. Suddenly, an unexpected risk event occurred. You quickly devised a response to deal with this negative risk event using which of the following outputs of Monitor and Control Risks?
Which of the following is considered the most critical EVM metric?
You are the project manager for a top-secret software project for an agency of the United States government. Your mission--should you choose to accept it--is to complete the project using internal resources. The reason is that finding contractors with top-secret clearances takes quite a bit of time, and waiting for clearances would jeopardize the implementation date. Your programmers are 80 percent of the way through the programming and testing work when your agency appoints a new executive director. Slowly but surely your programmers are taken off this project and reassigned to the executive director's hot new project. Which of the following type of project ending is this?
You are a project manager for Cinema Snicker Productions. Your company specializes in producing comedy films for the big screen. Your latest project has just been canceled because of budget cuts. Which of the following statements is true?
You are a project manager for Cinema Snicker Productions. Your company specializes in producing comedy films for the big screen. Your latest project has just been completed and accepted. You've been given your next project, which starts right away. Which of the following statements is true?
You are a project manager for Dutch Harbor Consulting. Your latest project involves the upgrade of an organization's operating system on 236 servers. You performed this project under contract. You are in the Close Procurements process and know that you should document which of the following? (Choose the best response.)
You are a project manager for Dutch Harbor Consulting. Your latest project involves the upgrade of an organization's operating system on 236 servers. You performed this project under contract. You are in the Close Procurements process and have reviewed the contracting process to identify lessons learned. What is the name of the tool and technique you used to perform this function?
Your project was just completed. Because of some unfortunate circumstances, the project was delayed, causing cost overruns at the end of the project. Which of the following statements is true?
Procurement audits review which of the following?
As a project manager, you're responsible for maintaining and ensuring integrity for all of the following except which one?
You are a project manager working on contract. You've performed earned value analysis and discovered that the project will be completed on time and under the original estimated amount. This means the profit to your company will decrease as will your personal bonus. Which of the following should you do?
You are a project manager for a manufacturing firm that produces Civil War-era replicas and memorabilia. You discover a design error during a test production run on your latest project. Time is a critical constraint on this project. Which of the following is the most likely response to this problem?
You are a project manager for a telecommunications firm. You're working on a project that entails upgrading technical hardware and equipment. The estimated cost of the hardware and equipment is $1,725,000. You are reviewing products from three different vendors. One of the competing vendors invites you to lunch. What is the most appropriate response?
You are a project manager for a telecommunications firm. You're working on a project that entails upgrading technical hardware and equipment. The estimated cost of the hardware and equipment is $1,725,000. You are reviewing products from three vendors. One of the vendors offers you and your family the use of the company yacht for the upcoming three-day weekend. What is the most appropriate response?
You are a project manager working on contract with a company in a foreign country. At the project kickoff meeting, you are given an expensive-looking gift. The person who presented this to you said that it is customary in their country to give their business partners gifts. What is the most appropriate response?
Life seems to be going very well for your close friend, a fellow PMP. She has taken a trip to France, bought a new car, and stocked her wine cellar with a couple dozen expensive bottles of wine, all within the last six months. After a few cocktails one evening, she tells you her secret. The vendor she's working with on the $4 billion project she's managing has given her all of these items as gifts. Which scenario is the most appropriate? (Choose the best answer.)
As a project manager, you know that the most important activity to ensure customer and stakeholder satisfaction is which of the following?
Your upcoming project includes project team members from a foreign country. To make certain that cultural differences don't interfere with team performance, thereby affecting the success of the project, your first course of action is to do which of the following?
You are a contract project manager working with the State of Bliss. Your latest project involves rewriting the Department of Revenue's income tax system. One of the key stakeholders is a huge movie buff, and she has the power to promote you into a better position at the conclusion of this project. She has discovered that one of her favorite superstars lives in the State of Bliss and therefore must file income tax returns in that state. She asks you to look up the account of this movie star. What is the most appropriate response?
You are a contract project manager working with the State of Bliss. Your latest project involves rewriting the Department of Revenue's income tax system. As project manager, you have taken all the appropriate actions regarding confidentiality of data. One of the key stakeholders is a huge movie buff, and she has the power to promote you into a better position at the conclusion of this project. She's reviewing some report data that just happens to include confidential information regarding one of her favorite movie superstars. What is the most appropriate response?
You are a project manager with several years of experience in project management. You've just accepted your first project in a foreign country. You've been in the country a week or two and are experiencing some disorientation. This is known as which of the following?
You are a project manager for a software manufacturing firm. The project you've just finished created a new software product that is expected to become a number-one seller. All prerelease of software is handled through the marketing department. A friend of yours is a certified software instructor. They have asked you for a copy of the software prior to the beta release so they can get familiar with it. What is the most appropriate response?
Being assigned as a project manager, you noticed during project execution that conflicts arise in the team on both technical and interpersonal levels. What is an appropriate way of handling conflicts?
What is the purpose of a project charter?
The concept of (the) _________ states that changes related to one requirement--scope, time, or cost--will at least influence one other element.
Your organization is considering to run a project which will entail an investment of $1,000,000. The product from the project is forecasted to create revenues of $250,000 in the first year after the end of the project and of $420,000 in each of the two following years. What is true for the net present value of the project over the three years cycle at a discount rate of 10%?
What does the term best practice often refer to?
The communications management plan is a document which includes descriptions of
_________ are usually not a manifestation of unique organizational cultures and styles.
Which of the following is generally not regarded as an element of active listening?
You were able to obtain measuring equipment with very high accuracy and precision. You used it to make a sequence of measurements directly at a production process output and depicted the results on the following control chart. USL X LSL t Which statement is the best conclusion from these results?
As the project manager, you decided to arrange a team meeting to identify and analyze lessons learned from quality control with stakeholders. What should you do with them?
Which of the following documents is not used as input for the validate scope process?
How should change management be planned for?
According to Bruce Tuckman, what are the stages of team development?
What is not a reason for companies to organize lessons learned?
How does a project management team stay in touch with the work and the attitudes of project team members?
Which document is developed along the risk management processes from identify risks through plan and implement risk responses to monitor risks?
A customer is requiring a minor scope change and expects you to do this without delays and additional costs. You believe that you have adequate authorization to make the decision by yourself, but you are not quite sure. What should be your next steps?
A facilitator should...
As the project manager in a software project which is currently initiated, you want to assess high-level risks. What should you do?
In most jurisdictions, a legally required order of formal statements establishing a contract is:
What should managers consider before conducting a performance evaluation interview with a project team member?
Which statement describes best handling of assumptions during the initiating processes?
A WBS dictionary is a document which...
You are in the process of contacting sellers to obtain bids and proposals. You found out that it might become a time-consuming procedure to ensure that the sellers get a clear and common understanding of the procurement process and of the needs of your project. Which technique may help you save time?
As a project manager, when should you especially consider cultural differences?
At the beginning of project execution, you notice different opinions between team members relating to project work and deliverables and to the level of overall complexity. What should you do right now?
You have just taken over as manager of a project that will create many benefits for the performing organization, but you sense a high level of resistance in various stakeholders right from the start. What is the most appropriate action to resolve the problem?
You are in the process of planning a project and found that stakeholders often have varying objectives and requirements. This makes it hard to come up with a plan with which all objectives will be met. What is probably most helpful to ensure common understanding?
Projects frequently do not meet customer expectations for which of the following reasons?
What is typical for critical path project management?
You are the project manager for the development of a new type of power plant. Your project is making fast progress, and it is getting nearer to the day of product acceptance. Which technique will be most important for product acceptance?
What are the cost types in modern quality management?
During the execution of a project to build a complex defense system, your team has run into a deep crisis. The project's goal and objectives have been challenging right from the start, but now you have discovered that your team members have become increasingly unaware of them. Being busy solving detail problems, they often fail to understand the overall requirements. Then they develop solutions which resolve issues in their area of limited responsibility, while causing new problems at the interfaces with other system components. Meanwhile, the team members show signs of growing frustration, and time is running away. How can you help your team in this situation?
For a project, the following earned value data have been assessed: AC: $ 4,000,000 CV: $ -500,000 SPI: 1.12 BaC: $ 9,650,000 What is the earned value of the project?
During execution in a project to build a major road bridge, your team found a major flaw in the technical drawings. On an ad-hoc base, they had to find and implement a workaround to avoid delays and mitigate technical problems. What should you do next?
You recently took over the assignment for a project. The project charter has been developed. What is an appropriate next step for you?
You scheduled a kick-off meeting in order to announce the start of your project, present the plan and develop consensus on it. Another topic will be explanation of each team member's role. In addition, you planned some time for discussions. You published the agenda of the kick-off meeting some weeks ago to all invited attendees. Now, short term before the event, you receive various cancellations by team members, who say that they cannot join the meeting. But they will be with you when project work will start.
During a meeting, a discussion came up: To which degree does your project have to be compliant to the processes enumerated in the PMBOK(R) Guide? What should be the guiding principle to answer this question?
Product acceptance criteria should be laid down in which document?
The cost baseline is developed during which process?
During project execution you found out that work is often not performed at the right time and in the right order. Deliverables are made by one team member that cannot be processed by another one. This already leads to timely rework and bad morale among team members. Which project management tool is most appropriate to deal with problems like this?
Your management is applying the 10 percent solution: It has requested that you reduce the budget for the project which you are currently initiating by 10%. What will this probably mean for your project?
While applying procurement management processes in your project, you identified the need to gain a more objective understanding of sellers' capabilities in order to rank proposals and develop a negotiating sequence. Which technique may help avoid bias and subjective decisions best?
During code inspection in a major software development project, a project management team identified frequent occurrences of critical programming errors. These errors are scattered across the code and occur without a discernible pattern. Which tool is most likely to help the team identify areas of error concentration in order to develop a prioritized response strategy?
The term baseline is used in both disciplines project management and configuration management. Which statement is not true?
In a project, a cost incentive contract has been awarded to a contractor with the following parameters: Target cost: $1,000,000 Target contractor fee: $100,000 Cost benefit sharing ratio: 80%/20% Price ceiling: $1,200,000 What is the point of total assumption (PTA, breakpoint) of the project?
The scope baseline includes____.
During human resource planning you identified that your team members are not sufficiently qualified for their tasks. Which may be an appropriate solution to this problem?
What is typical for high-context cultures?
In general, processes of configuration management do not include...
The ________ is a document which describes how the project management team will implement the performing organization's quality policy.
What do you expect when you are submitting an invitation for bid to sellers?
What is important for quality auditors?
What is best used to calculate the profit from an internal project?
You are running a major project with four sub-projects. Each of the sub-project managers has developed a risk management plan, identified many risks, analyzed them and planned for risk response. It is now two months later. What should you not do?
What is true for statistical sampling?
Geert Hofstede's cultural dimension of individualism refers to...
What is not true for change requests?
You recently assigned staff members to activities, estimated work and scheduled your project. You then created the following resource histogram for your staff: 100% 0% Project weeks What does this diagram tell you?
A project manager's PDM network schedule gets audited by a scheduling expert. The expert tells the project manager to focus more on nodes with "path convergence", also known as "sinks". What is the person referring to?
The members of your project team have been assigned to your project with general availability levels of 50%. Yesterday, they reported to you that significant variances occurred during project execution. You have noted that the team members have been spending less than 50% of their time working on your project. Your project schedule is about to become heavily delayed, and deadlines are in jeopardy. What should you do?
What is the meaning of the acronym CSOW?
You monitored figures on cost and planned/earned value for each individual project week until the data date at the end of the sixth week. What is the status of this project at this date? ProActual Earned Planned ject costs value value week 1 $65,000 $61,000 $67,000 2 $85,000 $79,000 $89,000 3 $100,000 $102,000 $110,000 4 $125,000 $124,000 $121,000 5 $135,000 $133,000 $139,000 63 6 $125,000 $120,000 $131,
Crashing describes a technique to speed up a project by...
During risk identification sessions, you and your team identified more than 150 risks for your project. You are afraid that evaluating each of these risks quantitatively will cost you an enormous amount of time, while not all of them are really relevant and important enough to justify such a measure. What should you do next?
During execution of a project, you observe that the performance of some of your team members is dropping, while others are doing a consistently good job. This is endangering overall project progress. What should you try first to bring the team as a whole back to performance?
Your management announced that they want to put you on a stretch assignment. In this situation, you should consider that...
Following the cultural approach of the corporation for which you are starting to manage a project, you are guiding your project team through the first life-cycle phase of conceptualization. Your next step is to call for a team meeting to let ideas emerge in an unrestricted creative process. What exactly should that look like?
In configuration management, which of the following is necessary to maintain the integrity of baselines?
Which statement describes best the purpose of the communications management plan?
Which is not a point used for three-point estimation?
Which of the following are not common barriers to project team building?
During project planning, you are presented with the following diagram that depicts a cumulative likelihood distribution for the duration of a project: Deadline 100% 0% Duration What kind of conclusion can you draw from the information depicted in it?
While executing a project, you sense a slightly negative attitude in your team. Which type of document do you now need, among others, to better understand and then be able to improve the situation?
The sales representative of your company recently contacted you. You made some estimates on direct costs for an offer on a firm fixed-price contract. According to company policies, indirect costs (overheads) are to be calculated as a percentage of the direct costs, the sum of both cost types caused him to calculate a far too high price. How should you not react?
A project charter is a document that...
You identified a technical risk in your project and assigned a contingency for that. Planning contingency reserves is part of which risk response strategy?
Which concept of locating team members can help them best to enhance their performance as a team?
Which statement on constructive changes is false?
You are assigned as a project manager for an internal project. During cost planning and budgeting you discovered that there are peak times of costs during the project and other times when costs are fairly low. What could this mean for the project?
You are going to take over a new project as the project manager in an enterprise unknown to you. What should you investigate during the chartering process?
A project was budgeted at $1,000,000. Meanwhile, the project is executed, and the following current figures have been assessed: PV: $500,000 EV: $450,000 AC: $550,000 Assuming that the cost variance was caused by one-time cost drivers, which are no more effective, what estimate at completion (EaC) can you derive from these figures?
An organization is considering various contract types in order to motivate sellers and to ensure preferential treatment. What should they consider before deciding to use an award fee contract?
What is least important when it comes to archiving project records?
_______ are not necessarily used to establish the cost baseline of a project.
You took over a customer project for your company. From the inputs available, including contract, statement of work and project charter, you have developed a project management plan. You already presented that plan in a meeting with key stakeholders including your project sponsor and some representatives from the customer organization. During the meeting you sensed a high level of dissatisfaction by the customer executives, who signaled that the project might not produce the results that their company had expected. In your understanding, all necessary actions have been planned to meet the customer's requirements. What should you do next?
A project was assessed and the following earned value data have been found: PV: $750,000 EV: $750,000 AC: $900,000 What is the burn rate of the project?
What is not true for project deliverables?
Your project, performed for a customer, is coming to an end. The customer has been contractually granted a three years warranty period for the product of the project. What should you do first?
Being the project manager in a high-risk electronics project with a lot of new technologies, you developed a risk management plan and identified risks which you documented in a risk register. Then, the risks were analyzed and response was planned. During risk control meetings, it gets obvious that the documents you created are not very helpful. What have you probably done wrong?
Which is generally not regarded as one of the three categories of culture that managers should master?
Post-mortem analysis after scheduled finish date of a project shows a CPI of 0.8 and an SPI of 1.25. What is a plausible explanation for that?
Some colleagues told you that they are planning, executing, monitoring and controlling a project by use of milestones only with durations between 1 and 4 weeks. What do you think?
Together with your team, you applied three-point estimation on a critical path which consists of two activities. The following duration uncertainties are all calculated assuming a 3sigma confidence interval. The duration uncertainty--defined as pessimistic minus optimistic estimate--of the first activity is 18 days; the second estimate has an uncertainty of 24 days. Applying the PERT formula for paths (beta distribution), what is the duration uncertainty of the entire path?
You are just leaving a meeting during which you have been assigned as the manager of a project to build a sub-station that is part of a major electric power distribution system. The decision to run the project has been made before your assignment and without your involvement. Some basic decisions on deliverables, staffing, budgeting and on the completion date have already been made as well. What should you do first?
What is the purpose of the following diagram?
Which is not a goal in both project management and quality management?
You created a baseline of your system configuration and added several changes to that as amendments. Meanwhile you are afraid that the big number of Deltas may cause inconsistencies and make you unable to understand the current system configuration. What should you do?
A request, demand or assertion of a contract partner for consideration, compensation or payment under a legally binding contract, such as a disputed change, is often referred to as a____.
Projects may be initiated by all of the following except____.
During planning processes, you used Monte Carlo simulation to quantitatively assess cost and schedule risks of your project. During risk control, you repeat the technique, and it leads to different results. What should not be the reason for that?
As a project manager you can assign any one of two team members to a highly coveted task. Both are equally capable, but one of them is a member of your ingroup. To the other one, you have far more distance. How should you behave?
You need a batch of 100 identical valves which will be custom made for your project to build a food processing plant. There is a risk of deterioration of victuals during processing; therefore you placed requirements on the quality of the raw materials for the valves, which will make production very costly. Unfortunately, in order to test the valves against these requirements, you would have to destroy them. And you have no experience with the vendors at all. What should you do?
Which statement is false? Progressive elaboration of project scope...
You are managing an internationally dispersed project team. The members of your team have different cultural backgrounds and primary languages, but all are educated and able to communicate eloquently in English. You should nevertheless bear in mind that...
When finishing a project, which factors that influence customer satisfaction the most should you be aware of?
When identifying the basis of the business need for a project all of the following can be considered except____,
Your project exceeded costs in the past caused by an underestimation of resource costs in the cost baseline: PV: $1,200,000, EV: $1,000,000, AC: $1,200,000 You expect the underestimation to influence the future as much as it did in the past. If the value of the remaining work (BAC EV) is at $1,000,000, what should be your new EAC (estimate at completion)?
What is true for the process of scope validation?
You finished your project for a customer to implement a business software solution. All deliverables have been handed over and are already in use by the company. There is a minor last payment to be made by the customer on contract closure. You believe that it is now getting time to finally close the contract with the customer and then administratively close down the project. You approached the customer this morning and found that they are reluctant to finally close the contract. But you do not exactly understand why. What should you not do?
At the end of an internal project, you find several key stakeholders including the sponsor reluctant to finally accept all deliverables and then close the project. What should not be your next step in this situation?
A project manager reported the following earned value data: PV: $12,400,000 EV: $14,500,000 AC: $14,500,000 What does this mean?
Your project had a cost overrun in the past and you tried to obtain funding on top of the original budget at completion (BAC). Management has told you that they cannot make additional funding available. You have to increase cost performance so that the project will be finished with costs not exceeding the original BAC. Which metric describes the future performance to meet this objective?
When running a project as a project manager, what should you focus on during the executing processes?
A review of your project team member's most recent performance reports shows a major drop in output. Which is the best approach to raise team productivity in a project?
A project customer and a contractor agreed on regular quality audits during execution by a third party audit team, which is working on an assignment for the customer. What should the contractor have prepared for the audits?
While planning a project, you are defining activities. Which of the following is not a result of that process?
What should you focus on when managing the stakeholders of your project?
What should not be your thoughts when you are organizing documents as lessons learned?
You are identifying key stakeholders for your project. Which of the following groups is least likely to be included?
_______ is normally not a method of RoI (return on investment) analysis.
What is the most important benefit of a 360 degree review?
You are using a phase gate approach for your project. What do you need to consider?
Post mortem earned value analysis of a project showed the following data: SPI: 0.78 CPI: 1.00 What is this telling you?
A project has undergone a major scope change, which increased cost and work levels. What does this mean for earned value data?
Which statement describes best the meaning of leadership?
As a project manager, you must demonstrate transparency regarding...
Who should always issue the project charter?
You are planning quality management for your project. How can a process flowchart help you?
A difference between a statement of work and a scope statement is:
You are the manager of a project for a company that is known to make heavy use of extrinsic motivators in order to boost morale and team performance. What does that mean? The motivators used...
You are currently finishing a project under contract to develop and build some machining equipment for a customer. Your organization took over the obligation to solve certain problems if they come up during a contractual warranty period of one year after start of production. What do you not have to consider during the warranty period?
When should a time and material contract with a contractor been chosen instead of a fixed price contract?
You are the manager of a major project to develop a system of barriers to prevent a seaside city from flooding. Together with your team you created a code of conduct stating that the change control board must be immediately notified of gifts when the value exceeds $90. The same applies to invitations when the value exceeds $150. Today, a contractor executive sent you an invitation for a night at an opera with a value of $95. It is a one-time event and you tried to obtain tickets by yourself without success. The person told you that he would so much wish to join you, but he will not be available on that day, and he could get hold of only one ticket anyway. What do you have to do?
What is not a major benefit of co-locating team members from different cultures in one place instead of having a team dispersed over many countries?
You are running a project to develop the production process for a future electronic component. Evaluating some first test batches, you found out that the precision is generally very good, but that you have some irregular outliers in a completely unpredictable pattern. What should you do?
As a leader, how should you deem ethical conduct?
You have recently been named as the manager of a new project under contract. The sponsor of the project gave you the contract signed by the customer and a statement of work. He asked you to go on with initiation. Which document should you develop next?
You are defining evaluation criteria for your project. The procurement item is readily available from a number of acceptable sellers. Which criterion can you focus on in such a situation?
When is passive risk acceptance an appropriate approach?
You are running a project to engineer and implement a set of business processes and a software solution for customer relationship management. The project involves a big number of performing organizationsa major corporation and many suppliers of different sizes. During the project you observed a restraining effect of differences between the companies' corporate cultures. This leads to different expectations on how such a project should be handled and to frequent misunderstandings between stakeholders. Another effect is a growing degree of distrust and skepticism. What should you try first to integrate the diverse stakeholder groups?
During execution of your project you have observed that a team member is getting isolated by other team members. Which is a wrong approach in such a situation?
In an organization, project managers report directly to the head of a project management office (PMO). In this case, which statement is probably not true?
What is the five whys method used for?
The use of scarce resources must be decided upon with functional managers before it causes delays in your project. Which is probably your most important skill right now?
Which question is not appropriate for a weighting system to evaluate seller's performance according to weighted criteria?
Which is not an example of a correctly handled contract closure procedure?
You gathered a lot of knowledge on project management in your business life. What is an appropriate use for that?
Respect is...
During a post-mortem meeting, discussion arises about who has to take responsibility for some major failures. It has become obvious that the attendees of the meeting will not come to a jointly accepted conclusion. What is not an appropriate strategy for such a situation?
Understanding cultural key similarities and differences is especially important for...
Your project team is on its way to finish work on the project, while you have the impression that a staff member is already negotiating the next assignment in another project. You are afraid that the person may come under pressure to start working on the other job before she has finished her work for your project. Her task is very complex, and it would be hard for someone else to take up the partial results and finish them. What action is most likely to resolve the situation?
When control charts are used, outliers are...
You are running a project which was budgeted based on some rough order of magnitude (ROM) estimates with a precision of -50% /+100%. Meanwhile, with new estimates made on detail level and some work already finished, you found out that these estimates were consistently too low and the budget will not be sufficient to successfully run and finish the project. What should you do?
Which is typically not specified in a document referred to as activity attributes?
In a country with high level of violence in public, a local police officer requires a private money transfer to ensure the safety of your team. How do you react?
Which is not a type of project review meeting?
You are performing integrated change control. Which of the following will not be part of what you do?
You are project manager for a strategic project with a multi-million dollars value assigned by a company that is listed at a US stock exchange. Recent Earned Value Analysis after app. 25% completion told you that your project has a CPI of 0.76. What should you do right now?
A management point in a work breakdown structure (WBS) used to consolidate and process work package data and forward the results to the project manager is called
In project management, work authorization is normally not...
When you perform quality assurance in your project, which technique could you typically use?
The _______ can be used to assess outlays and funding requirements.
Which technique has been applied to develop the following diagram? 164 17% 0% 1.1 Optimistic costs -$123,000.00 -$123,000.00 FALSE 1 Use existing staff -$169,220.00 $0.00 66% 0% 1.2 Most likely costs -$158,000.00 -$158,000.00 17% 0% 1.3 Pessimistic costs -$259,000.00 -$259,000.00 Make or buy? Implementation costs -$149,500.00 50% 50% 2.1 Optimistic costs -$35,000.00 -$85,000.00 TRUE 2 Hire new staff -$99,500.00 -$50,000.00 50% 50% 2.2 Pessimistic costs -$164,000.00 -$214,000.00 33% 0% 3.1 Optimistic costs -$120,000.00 -$140,000.00 FALSE 3 Use contractor staff -$207,100.00 -$20,000.00 67% 0% 3.2 Pessimistic costs -$250,000.00 -$270,000.
Your organization has the choice between several internal projects it could run. In order to select projects, the organization assessed their strategic importance, investment requirements, and expected cash inflow from the projects' products, services and results. What should the organization assess in addition?
Which of the following is not a forecasting method?
Processes of configuration management commonly include all of the following except:
A project manager tracks the work of team members using a network logic diagram. Which effect will the presence of an actual finish date have on the calculation of float for the finished activity?
Your project work has generally been finished and you want to commence a solid closing process for the project. What must have been attained to begin this process?
The situational leadership model as defined by Paul Hersey and Ken Blanchard consists of the stages____.
A Pareto chart helps focusing on...
When should the project schedule be developed?
What is wrong in this diagram? PV Data $ date EV AC Project weeks
What is the purpose of control limits?
What is not the main purpose of a final project report?
You are managing a project that bears a risk to either permanently damage or strongly improve the reputation of the performing organization with its customer base. You decide to call a meeting with the organization's management to make them aware of the issue and discuss possible options. Which risk response strategy are you applying?
A project manager has developed various risk response strategies for a high-risk project. When presenting some of the results, she emphasizes the importance of putting the responses into action instead of leaving them documented as a plan that might get forgotten. Which process is she most likely referring to?
For a project to replace an older ERP software with a more modern tool in an organization, you have identified a number of risks. You have documented them in a detailed list. A manger from executive level has asked you now to summarize the overall project risk exposure with appropriate metrics, as well as individual high-level risks along with a quick presentation of responses with their pros and cons. Which document is probably required by the person in this situation?
In order to prepare yourself for a new project assignment that requires adaptive methods, you have developed a plan for how to tailor the project management approach using a combination of some agile principles with other, more predictive techniques. Regarding your own personal development, which aspect of the PMI talent triangle did you particularly address?
The organization for which you are currently managing an IT infrastructure project has informed you that they have hired an agile coach who is now available to help with several projects, including yours. In a meeting to get to know each other, the coach suggests to introduce regular project retrospectives. You are thinking about what the person might be referring to. What would be the best answer?
A project manager is asked to contribute to a document to describe what is intended to be achieved with a project once it is successfully finished, and how this will be measured. What could be the name of that document?
Which of the following can usually be referred to as factors which trigger the need for a new project?
What is a project business case?
Which type of Organizational Process Asset should be updated by the project team?
What is not a characteristic of what is referred to as an "organic organization"?
Stakeholders such as suppliers, customers, and end users have what in common?
Which is an area where project managers should particularly collaborate and share detailed knowledge about the project with other professionals?
Which of the following is usually recognized as a form of power for a project manager?
A project manager hears about an issue and decides to ask the project team about more details as to how and when this happened. Is this more of a team management or more of a team leadership approach in this moment?
A Scrum Master talks to you about the impact and value of servant leadership. What is the person probably referring to?
Which is not a trend in project integration practices?
What is a purpose of agile release planning?
What is a product backlog?
What does an iteration burndown chart track?
Which is not one of the five levels of increasingly effective quality management?
Which is an advantage of self-organizing teams?
Which is a category framework that is suitable for prompt lists?
For one of the risks identified in your project, propinquity has been marked as "high" in the risk register. What does this mean?
A member of the project management team has come up with a 3D model of stakeholder influence and interest in your project. What could this be referred to?
How are a procurement lifecycle and contracts related?
Your project depends on two business partners, On The Fly Inc. (OTF) and The Sure Thing Inc. (ST), delivering their products to you on time. The chances are three out of four that OTF will make the delivery in time and two out of three that ST will not make the delivery on time. The probability that OTF and ST will both deliver in time is equal to:
All of the following are true about a project except:
You are being interviewed by a functional manager who says, "We have this huge undertaking of launching an online education website that contains different components, such as designing the website, developing the content, developing the administrative system including registration and payment, marketing the courses on the website, integrating different components of the website, and finally going live. Each component is functionally complex and large enough that it will be better served under a different management." The manager is most likely describing a:
Effective project management requires that a project manager must have the following characteristics:
The role of a project manager is more of a coordinator or an expediter in organizations with the following structure(s):
Which of the following is not an example of a project selection method?
Your company runs a website that makes digital music downloads available to end users. You have been assigned a project that involves adding parental guidance warnings attached to various downloads. This project originated due to which of the following?
What document is the result of the project initiation process group?
Which of the following is true about assumptions in the project initiation?
You are preparing to develop the project charter for a project codenamed String Theory. As part of this effort, you are studying the project statement of work. You must be able to find the following three elements that the SOW includes or refers to:
The initiating stage of a project produces the following documents:
The three important output items of initiating a project are the project charter, stakeholder register, and:
Which of the following is not the output of directing and managing project execution?
You are directing and managing the execution of your project. Which of the following is the correct order of executing the processes when you are executing them for the first time during this project?
You are directing and managing the project execution. You see that there are some change requests that some stakeholders are pushing for implementation. However, these change requests have no record of being approved. These change requests:
You have just submitted a few important change requests to the change control board for their evaluation and recommendations. What process are you executing?
Walking down the hallway, you heard a program manager saying to a project manager, "You need the performance reports to run this process." Which process is the program manager referring to?
Which of the following scenarios will not trigger the closure stage of the project?
Your project has entered the closing stage, and you are planning for the project review. Which of the following guidelines will you follow for the review?
Your project has no phases. Almost all the project work has been performed. It has been a successful project. At which stage has this successful project arrived when the closing process starts?
Which of the following is a false statement about the project scope management plan?
Which of the following is not a constraint common to projects?
Which of the following constitutes the project scope baseline?
You are in the process of developing the scope management plan for your project. You will develop this plan:
You are planning the scope for your project. You have just created the requirements documentation after meeting with the stakeholders and studying the project charter. This requirements documentation can be used in developing:
Which of the following is the correct order of running processes?
You estimate the duration of an activity as five days because an expert told you that it took five days to complete a similar activity in a previous project. Which of the following methods have you used for your activity duration estimate?
You are the project manager of a project that is running behind schedule. The project sponsor is very unhappy at the new finish date that you proposed, but he has accepted it. However, you also requested extra funds to support the extended time of work, and the sponsor has refused to supply more funds and is threatening to cancel the project if you cannot finish it within the planned budget. What are your options?
Consider the following network diagram. Which of the following is the critical path?
You use a three-point estimate for activity duration estimating. An activity has a duration of 9 days for an optimistic scenario, 18 days for a pessimistic scenario, and 12 days for the most likely scenario. Which of the following will you take as the duration estimate for this activity if you use the PERT analysis?
Your project is in the planning stage. You first want to make the cost estimates for the planned project activities, and then you want to aggregate those costs. Which process will you perform first?
Which of the following processes will you perform first?
Your supervisor has asked you to put some contingency reserve into your project plans. Which of the following is not true about contingency reserve?
Assume that you are the project manager for the construction of a 15-mile road. Further assume that the work is uniformly distributed over 12 weeks. The total approved budget for this project is $600,000. At the end of the first three weeks of work, $160,000 has been spent, and five miles of road have been completed. What is the earned value of the project at the end of the first three weeks?
Assume that you are the project manager for the construction of a 15-mile road. Further assume that the work is uniformly distributed over 12 weeks. The total approved budget for this project is $600,000. At the end of the first three weeks of work, $160,000 has been spent, and five miles of road have been completed. What is the planned value of the project at this point in time?
Assume that you are the project manager for the construction of a 15-mile road. Further assume that the work is uniformly distributed over 12 weeks. The total approved budget for this project is $600,000. At the end of the first three weeks of work, $160,000 has been spent, and five miles of road have been completed. What is the cost variance?
Assume that you are the project manager for the construction of a 15-mile road. Further assume that the work is uniformly distributed over 12 weeks. The total approved budget for this project is $600,000. At the end of the first three weeks of work, $160,000 has been spent, and five miles of road have been completed. What is the schedule variance?
A CPI value of 1.25 and an SPI value of 1.33 for a project mean which of the following?
The funds available for your project have been cut due to the severe effect of the economic downturn. Which of the following aspects of your project may be influenced by this cut?
An influential stakeholder has submitted a request for completing the project earlier than planned. What are the two parameters that are most likely to be affected by this time change?
You are managing a project in biotechnology code named Mitochondria Eve. You need performance measurements to write the performance reports. Which process(es) will you run?
Management has asked you to produce a chart that depicts the resource assignments for all the activities in the project. Which of the following charts is management referring to?
Which of the following is not an output of the Develop Human Resource Plan process?
Which of the following is a true statement about the staff management plan?
Which of the following is generally the best conflict-resolution technique in most situations?
Karl, one of your team members, is arguing with you over how to perform a specific task. At the end of a long discussion, you say, "Karl, please do me a favor and do it this way for my peace of mind." Which conflict resolution technique are you using?
Which of the following is not a situation well suited for team development efforts?
You heard in the hallway that the project manager of the Da Vinci Code project, named Pappu Gloria, has very poor soft skills. If this is true, Pappu Gloria needs to improve his:
Which of the following is usually not the tool or technique you need to acquire a project team?
Pam Cruise, the engineering manager, receives a daily progress report from all engineers she manages. She also visits the cubicles of the engineers several times a day to ensure that they are working and not just browsing the web. Most of the engineers agree that she is a micromanager. What kind of management theory is she applying?
Gary Meltzer, the engineering manager, receives weekly progress reports from all engineers he manages. He encourages them to take ownership of their assignments. Most of the engineers agree that he trusts his engineers. What kind of management theory is he applying?
Susan Travis, the project manager, receives weekly progress reports from all engineers she manages. She rewards the achievements of her employees and always gives the credit to her employees for their accomplishments. She is always interested in mentoring her team members and putting them on a career path. She also helps the good performers get the assignments and projects of their choice. What kind of management theory is she applying?
Which of the following is not an input to identifying stakeholders?
Which of the following lists the documents in the order their first drafts are written?
You are trying to understand the message sent to you by one of your team members who lives on the other side of the globe. The team member has used lots of local phrases and acronyms that you are trying to understand. According to the basic communication model, what are you dealing with here?
Which of the following is not an output of the Distribute Information process?
The issue log is an input used in the following process:
The change log is used in the following process:
Manage Stakeholder Expectations is a process that belongs to which knowledge area?
Whose responsibility is it to manage stakeholder expectations?
You have created the performance report about the project that you are managing. Which process will you use to distribute the report among the stakeholders?
Which of the following communication processes are in the executing process group?
The sponsor of your project wants to look at the raw data from executing the project-that is, the work performance information. Which process should you run to get this information?
The sponsor of your project wants to look at the work performance measurements. Which process should you run to get this information?
What is the name of a quality planning technique that involves comparing the results of similar activities?
One of the fundamental tenets of modern quality management is:
Which of the following is not an input to the QA process?
You are the project manager for the Mind the Gap project. You are going to meet with your project team to discuss how to ensure that the project will be completed without any deviations from the project requirements. Which of the following processes are you performing?
You are using an Ishikawa diagram to find the real causes of a problem by exploring all the possible causes. Which quality process are you performing?
You are managing a software project with limited development resources. The QA department has discovered a large number of defects in the product, and the project sponsor is very concerned about this. You want to get the maximum number of defects repaired with minimal effort. Which quality-control tool are you going to use before you direct the efforts of the project team to fix specific problems?
You are the project manager for a software development project that has limited resources. The customer is concerned about the quality of the code developed and wants you to conduct a code review. The product contains a large body of code with millions of lines. Which approach will you take?
Which of the following is not a tool or technique used in the Perform Quality Control process?
Which of the following is not an information-gathering technique used in the risk identification process?
You are managing a project to set up data servers to support a website for an enterprise customer. The location for the servers has been chosen close to the customer due to their requirements. However, this location is prone to natural disasters, such as hurricanes and flooding. You have decided to install some extra servers in another city that will act as backup if a disaster happens. This is an example of which of the following?
The risk management team of a software project has decided that due to the lack of adequate talent in your company, development of a specific part of the system is under high risk, so they have decided to outsource it. This is an example of which of the following?
Consider Figure 9.12. Assume that the risk has a 50% probability of occurrence. If the risk does occur, it could have a positive or a negative impact equivalent to $200,000 or $50,000, respectively, with the probabilities shown in the figure. What is the EMV for the positive impact?
Consider Figure 9.13. Assume that the risk has a 50% probability of occurrence. If the risk does occur, it could have a positive or a negative impact equivalent to $200,000 or $50,000, respectively, with the probabilities shown in the figure. What is the EMV for the risk?
A project manager is getting risk-related recommended corrective actions approved. In which of the following processes is the project manager involved?
A project manager is looking for approved change requests in order to perform a process. Which process is he preparing for?
Which of the following is not an input to the Monitor and Control Risks process?
You are a project manager at a company that is a seller for another company. You are coordinating the efforts to bid on a contract with another company to develop a product for the other company. Which of the following contract types carries the most risk for your company?
You are managing a software project. The project is already in the execution stage when you discover that a whole software module is missing from the work breakdown structure. Your company does not have the programmers to write the module in a timely fashion, so you decide to procure this piece of work. The module will have a number of small programs working together, and it will take almost the same effort to write any of these programs. The software experts have given you an estimate of how much that effort will be. However, it is not clear at this stage how many programs will be needed. Which type of contract will you choose in this situation?
The analysis to make a buy-or-make decision is performed during which of the following stages of procurement?
Your company is outsourcing a part of your project and therefore is preparing procurement documents. Which of the following is true about the procurement documents?
Your organization is playing the seller role in doing a part of the project for another company, the buyer. The buyer has incomplete specifications for the work involved and wants you to start the work after signing the agreement. Which of the following contract types will be the most beneficial for your organization?
Which of the following is the correct order to perform the listed processes for the first time?
Which of the following is not an activity of the procurement closure of a project?
The lessons learned are an output of which closing process(es)?
A series of activities to create a unique product or service by a specific date is best described as which one of the following?
Which of the following is likely to be part of an operation?
Of the following, which one is the best example of progressive elaboration?
Your organization would like to create a new product based on market research. This new product will be created by a project. This is an example of which one of the following reasons to launch a new project?
A program is which one of the following?
Who manages programs? PART I
You have an excellent idea for a new project that can increase productivity by 20 percent in your organization. Management, however, declines to approve the proposed project because too many resources are already devoted to other projects. You have just experienced what?
Of the following, which is not part of the Iron Triangle?
Of the following, which statement is correct?
Projects are temporary endeavors to create a unique product, service, or result. Which one of the following does not relate to the concept of "temporary" in project management?
A project creates a unique product, service, or result. Which one of the following is a result?
What is the difference between a standard and a regulation?
A project manager needs five areas of expertise to be successful. Which one is not one of the five areas of expertise?
Which one of the following is not a characteristic of a project's cultural and social environment?
You are the project manager of the KHGT Project, which will span four countries around the world. You will need to consider all of the following characteristics of the international and political environment except for which one?
Which one of the following is not an example of an interpersonal skill?
What is a subproject? PART I
Where will a project manager most likely get project management mentoring?
Which one of the following is an example of operations?
When considering the selection of projects to be initiated, project portfolio management considers all of the following except for which one?
The project life cycle is comprised of which of the following?
Marci Koening, the project manager for the ERP Project, is about to complete the project phase review. The completion of a project phase is also known as which of the following?
Which of the following best describes a project deliverable?
The compilation of all the phases within a project equates to the ___________ _________.
Which of the following describes the early stages of a project?
At which point is the risk of failure the lowest, but the consequence of failure the highest?
Project team members are most likely to work full-time on a project in which of the following organizational structures?
Why would an organization divide a project into phases? PART I
All of the following are true statements about the project life cycle, except for which one?
You are the project manager of a new project. When is the level of failing to achieve the objectives the highest within your project?
Which one of the following is an example of a positive stakeholder?
None of the following are key project stakeholders, except for which one?
You are a project manager acting in a functional organization. The functional manager and you disagree about several deliverables the project will be creating. The functional manager insists that you begin the project work now. What must you do?
You are a project manager working under a PMO. Your project resources are shared among several projects. To whom will the project team members report?
At what point in the project may stakeholders most cost-effectively recommend changes to the project deliverable?
An organization has elected to kill a project. When is this decision most likely made?
Nancy is a project manager for the NHG Corporation. She has identified several positive stakeholders for her construction project and a few negative stakeholders. Nancy and the project team have been meeting regularly with the positive stakeholders, but have not met with the negative stakeholders. What can happen if Nancy ignores negative stakeholders?
All of the following are cultural attributes of an organization, except for which one?
The project management plan defines which one of the following? PART I
Who has full authority over project funding in a weak matrix?
What is a project process?
There are five project management processes that allow projects to move from start to completion. Which one of the following is not one of the project management process groups?
Of the following, which is the logical order of the project management processes?
The ongoing process of project planning is also known as _________________.
You are the project manager for the AQA Project. You would like to include several of the customers in the project planning sessions. Your project leader would like to know why the stakeholders should be involved since your project team will be determining the best method to reach the project objectives. You should include the stakeholders because _____________.
You have requested that several of the stakeholders participate in the initiation of the project. Why is this important?
What is the purpose of the planning process group?
When is a project manager selected? PART I
Which one of the following statements best describes what project management is?
In order for a project to be successful, there must be four conditions. Which one of the following is not a condition required for project success?
When a project manager and a project team choose the processes that they deem applicable to their project, this is called what?
In which process group will the project team be acquired?
You are the project manager of a new project. You have worked with management to identify several initial assumptions and constraints for your project. Where will these items be documented?
When does a project become officially authorized?
When does the vast majority of a project's budget get expended?
You have identified a negative risk within your project and would like to implement a workaround to the risk. A workaround is an example of what?
Which process group can provide feedback between project phases?
Which process aims to eliminate causes of unsatisfactory performance?
A project has been cancelled. Which process must happen next? PART I
Management has determined that your project must be completed by December 30. This date is an input to your planning process group and is considered what?
You are the project manager for a pharmaceutical company. You are currently working on a project for a new drug your company is creating. A recent change in a law governing drug testing will impact your project and change your project scope. The first thing you should do as project manager is:
You are the project manager for the HALO Project. You and your project team are preparing the project plan. Of the following, which one is a project plan development constraint you and your team must consider?
The primary purpose of your project management plan is:
Of the following, which one is an input to project plan development?
Which one of the following is an example of defect repair review?
You are the project manager of the NHG Project. You have had to terminate a contract with a vendor. What is this an example of?
The project plan provides a baseline for several things. Which one of the following does the project plan not provide a baseline for?
You are the project manager for your organization. When it comes to integrated change control, you must ensure that which one of the following is present?
The project plan provides what in regard to project changes?
You are assisting the project manager for the DGF Project. This project is to design and implement a new application that will connect to a database server. Management has requested that you create a method to document technical direction on the project and any changes or enhancements to the technical attributes of the project deliverable. Which one of the following would satisfy management's request?
Who directs the performance of the planned project activities?
You have just informed your project team that each team member will be contributing to the lessons-learned documentation. Your team does not understand this approach and wants to know what the documentation will be used for. Which one of the following best describes the purpose of the lessons-learned documentation?
Which one of the following measures project performance?
Configuration management is a process for applying technical and administrative direction and surveillance of the project implementation. Which activity is not included in configuration management?
All of the following are addressed in the project charter, except for which one?
Which one of the following is an example of a mathematical model?
You and the project management team are creating a preliminary project scope statement. As part of this activity, which one of the following should be included in the preliminary project scope statement?
What is the purpose of the project management plan?
The project steering committee is considering which project they should invest capital in. Mary's project promises to be worth $175,000 in four years. The project steering committee is interested in Mary's project, but they would like to know the present value of the return if the interest rate is 6 percent. What is the present value of Mary's project?
You have just completed the project work and scope verification. You are ready, you believe, to commence administrative closure for your project. You realize that you need to do several things to complete the administrative closure process. Which one of the following is not part of the administrative closure process?
Which project management plan guides the creation of the detailed project scope statement?
Which one of the following is not needed to define the project scope?
You are the project manager of the BHY Project. Your project customer has demanded that the project be completed by December 1. December 1 is an example of which one of the following?
The lowest-level item in a WBS is called what?
You are working with the project team to create the WBS. There are some elements in the WBS that can't be broken down yet. You and the team elect to break down these items later in the project as more details become available. This approach to creating the WBS is also known as what?
Your WBS is numbered in a hierarchical fashion for easy identification and reference. This numbering scheme is called what?
Which two items are parts of the scope baseline for the project?
Scope verification leads to what?
What is the only tool and technique used during scope verification?
David, one of your project team members, has been making changes to his work, which, as a result, changes the project scope. David's changes are also known as what?
Which system defines how the project scope and the product scope can be changed?
A change has been approved in Marcy's project. All of the following must be updated to reflect the change, except for which one?
A project team member has, on his own initiative, added extra vents to an attic to increase air circulation. The project plan did not call for these extra vents, but the team member decided they were needed based on the geographical location of the house. The project team's experts concur with this decision. This is an example of:
Which of the following is an output of scope control?
You are the project manager for the JHG Project. Your project is to create a new product for your industry. You have recently learned that your competitor is also working on a similar project, but their offering will include a computeraided program and Web-based tools, which your project does not offer. You have implemented a change request to update your project accordingly. This is an example of which of the following?
You are the project manager of a large project. Your project sponsor and management have approved you to outsource portions of the Chapter 5: Managing the Project Scope 157 project plan. What must be considered if a change request affects the procured work?
A project team member has asked you what a scope statement is. Which of the following is a characteristic of a project scope statement?
One of the stakeholders of the project you are managing asks why you consider the project scope statement so important in your project management methodology. You answer her question with which of the following?
You are the project manager for a large construction project. The architect has provided your project team with blueprints detailing the exact layout of the building your team will be creating. He insists that the team follow the blueprints as he's designed them. The blueprints are an example of which one of the following?
Complete this sentence: Project scope management is primarily concerned with defining and controlling ________________________.
You are the project manager of the HGF Project. You would like to use a portion of the activity list from the HGB Project, which is similar to your current project. The portion of the activity list from the HGB Project is best described as which one of the following?
Which one of the following is the best example of rolling wave planning?
You are working with your project team to break down the project work into activities. Which component in the WBS must be broken down to get to the schedule activities?
Which one of the following will not be included in the activity list created with the project management team?
Mary has created an activity list with her project team. She has included activity attributes for each of the activities in her project's activity list. Of the following, which one is not an example of an activity attribute that Mary likely included?
Your project team agrees that the server's operating system must first be installed before the application can be installed. This best describes which one of the following? Chapter 6: Managing Project Time 195
You are working with your project team to schedule activities for your construction project. You have scheduled the painting activity to be completed PART II before the carpet installation activity may begin. The relationship between the painting activity and carpet installation activity can be best described as which one of the following?
Examine the following illustration. How long will the project last?
Examine the following illustration. If Activity B is delayed by two days, how late will the project be?
Examine the following illustration. Which path is the critical path?
Consider a project that is to begin work on a Monday and a project team that will not work any weekends. The critical path of the project is 17 days. On what day of the week will the project be completed?
Mike, a project manager in your company, is falling behind on the project schedule. He has elected to crash the project. What is crashing?
Which estimating technique uses a similar project to predict how long the current project will take to complete?
You are using a three-point estimate for your project. Howard reports that his optimistic estimate is 16 hours, his most likely estimate is 24 hours, and the pessimistic estimate is 65 hours. What is the estimated duration for Howard's activity?
The framing activity cannot begin until the concrete has cured for 36 hours. The time between the concrete activity and the framing activity is best described as which one of the following?
Which one of the following best describes the critical path?
Schedule control is part of which project management process?
Which system can manage changes to the project schedule?
Which schedule development tool does not consider the availability of the project resources only when the work may take place in the project?
What happens when a project manager elects to crash a project?
You are using a previous similar project to predict the costs of the current project. Which of the following best describes analogous estimating?
You are the project manager for a new technology implementation project. Management has requested that your estimates be as exact as possible. Which one of the following methods of estimating will provide the most accurate estimate?
What does the cost change control system do?
You have just started a project for a manufacturer. Project team members report they are 30 percent complete with the project. You have spent $25,000 of the project's $250,000 budget. What is the earned value for this project?
You and your project team are about to enter a meeting to determine project costs. You have elected to use bottom-up estimating and will base your estimate on the WBS. Which one of the following is not an attribute of bottom-up estimating?
You are the project manager for a consulting company. Your company has two possible projects to manage, but they can only choose one. Project WQQ is worth $217,000, while Project LB is worth $229,000. Management elects to choose Project LB. The opportunity cost of this choice is which one of the following?
You are the project manager for the CSR Training Project, and 21,000 customer service reps are invited to attend the training session. Attendance is optional. You have calculated the costs of the training facility, but the workbook expense depends on how many students register for the class. For every 5,000 workbooks created, the cost is reduced by a percentage of the original printing cost. The workbook expense is an example of which one of the following?
You are the project manager of a construction project scheduled to last 24 months. You have elected to rent a piece of equipment for the project's duration, even though you will need the equipment only periodically throughout the project. The costs of the equipment rental per month are $890. This is an example of which of the following?
You are the project manager of the BHG Project. Your BAC is $600,000. You have spent $270,000 of your budget. You are now 40 percent done with the project, though your plan called for you to be 45 percent done with the work by this time. What is your CPI?
Management has requested that you complete a definitive cost estimate for your current project. Which one of the following must exist in order to complete this estimate?
You need to procure a highly specialized chemical for a research project. There is only one vendor available that provides the materials you need. This scenario is an example of what market condition?
Of the following cost estimating inputs, which one is the least reliable?
You can purchase pea gravel for your project at $437 per metric ton. You need four tons of the pea gravel, so you predict your costs will be $1,748. This is an example of which cost estimating approach?
Which one of the following is an example of resource cost rates that a project manager could use to predict the cost of the project? Chapter 7: Managing Project Costs 231
You have created a cost estimate for a new project that you'll be managing in your organization. All of the following should be included in your cost PART II estimate, except for which one?
Linda is the project manager of a construction project. The budget for her project is $275,000. The project team made a mistake early in the project that cost $34,000 in added materials. Linda does not believe the mistakes will likely happen again because the team is 30 percent complete with the project and things are once again going smoothly. Her sponsor wants to know how much more funding Linda will likely need on the project. What should Linda tell the sponsor?
A project had a budget of $750,000 and was completed on time. The project expenses, however, were 15 percent more than what the project called for. What is the earned value of this project?
A project had a budget of $750,000 and was completed on time. The project expenses, however, were 15 percent more than what the project called for. What is the variance at completion for this project?
Marty's project has a cost variance of $44,000. He needs to complete what type of report?
You are a construction manager for a construction project. The project will be using a new material that the project team has never worked with before. You allot $10,000 to train the project team on the new materials so that the project will operate smoothly. The $10,000 for training is known as what?
You are the project manager for the BBB Project. Stacy, a project team member, is confused about what QA is. Which of the following best describes QA?
You are the project manager for the Photo Scanning Project. This project is similar to another project you have completed. Your project is to electronically store thousands of photos for your city's historical society. Quality is paramount on this project. Management approaches you and asks why you have devoted so much of the project time for planning. Your response is which of the following?
You are the project manager for the Floor Installation Project. Today, you plan to meet with your project team to ensure that the project is completed with no deviations from the project requirements. This process is which of the following?
You are the project manager for the ASE Project, which must map to industry standards in order to be accepted by the customer. You and your team have studied the requirements and have created a plan to implement the deliverables with the appropriate level of quality. What is this process called?
A fishbone diagram is the same as a(n) ______________________ chart.
Management has asked you to define the correlation between quality and the project scope. Which of the following is the best answer?
Which of the following is most true about quality? Chapter 8: Managing Project Quality 253
You are the project manager for the KOY Project, which requires quality that maps to federal guidelines. To ensure that you can meet these standards, you PART II have elected to put the project team through training specific to the federal guidelines your project must adhere to. The costs of these classes can be assigned to which of the following?
You are the project manager for the KOY Project, which requires quality that maps to federal guidelines. During a quality audit, you discover that a portion of the project work is faulty and must be done again. The requirement to do the work is an example of which of the following?
You are the project manager of the JKL Project, which currently has some production flaws. Which analysis tool will allow you to determine the cause and effect of the production faults?
Linda is the project manager of a manufacturing project. She and her project team are using design of experiments to look for ways to improve quality. Which of the following best describes design of experiments?
You are the project manager of the Global Upgrade Project. Your project team consists of 75 project team members around the world. Each team member will be upgrading a piece of equipment in many different facilities. Which of the following could you implement to ensure that project team members are completing all of the steps in the install procedure with quality?
Mark is the project manager of the PMH Project. Quality audits of the deliverables show several problems. Management has asked Mark to create a chart showing the distribution of problems and their frequencies. Given this, management wants which of the following?
In the illustration, what does the circled area represent?
You are an IT project manager and are working with the project team to determine the best computer system for the project. You and the project team decide to measure the performance of both systems to determine which one performs best. This is an example of which one of the following?
A project manager has elected not to enforce safety measures on his construction project. One of the project team members has been injured Chapter 8: Managing Project Quality 255 because of this oversight, and the job site is closed until an investigation into the lack of safety measures is completed. The project will now likely be late, be fined for the error, and will lose profitability with the customer. This is an example of which one of the following?
Your organization uses total quality management as part of its quality assurance program. Maria, a leader in your organization's quality assurance program, informs you that she will be reviewing your project to determine if your project management activities comply with the total quality management program. This is an example of which one of the following?
You are the project manager for a plastics manufacturer. You would like to illustrate the categories of quality failure within your project so that you and your project team can attack the largest areas of failure first. This type of chart is known as which one of the following?
What is the following type of chart called?
You are the project manager for the JHG Project. This project requires coordination with the director of manufacturing, HR, the IT department, and the CIO. This is an example of what type of input to organizational planning?
Your project requires an electrician at month eight. This is an example of which of the following?
You are the project manager of the PUY Project. This project requires a chemical engineer for seven months of the project, although there are no available chemical engineers within your department. This is an example of which of the following?
You are the project manager in an organization with a weak matrix. Who will have the authority in your project?
You are the project manager for the LMG Project. Your project will have several human resource issues that must be coordinated and approved by the union. Which of the following statements is correct about this scenario?
You are the project manager of the PLY Project. This project is similar to the ACT Project you have completed. What method can you use to expedite the process of organizational planning?
Which of the following is an example of theory X?
You are the project manager of the PLN Project. The team members are somewhat "afraid" of you as project manager because they see you as management. They know that a negative review from you about their project work will impact their yearly bonus. This is an example of which of the following?
You are the project manager of the MMB Project. The president of the company has spoken to the project team and told them of the confidence and respect he has in you to lead the project to a successful completion. The project manager has what type of power on this project?
Management has approached Tyler, one of your project team members. Tyler is a database administrator and developer whose work is always on time, accurate, and of quality. He also has a reputation of being a "good guy" and is well liked. Because of this, management has decided to move Tyler into the role of a project manager for a new database administration project. This is an example of which of the following?
Which problem-solving technique is the best for most project management situations?
Harold is an outspoken project team member. All of the project team members respect Harold for his experience with the technology, but often, things have to go in Harold's favor or things do not go well. During a discussion on a solution, a project team member waves her arms and says, "Fine, Harold, do it your way." This is an example of which of the following?
You are the project manager for the GBK Project. This project affects a line of business, and the customer is anxious about the success of the project. Which of the following is likely not a top concern for the customer?
Which theory believes that workers need to be involved with the management process?
___________________ states that as long as workers are rewarded they will remain productive.
You are the project manager for Industrial Lights Project. You have been hired by your organization specifically because of your vast experience with the technology and with projects of this nature. The project team is aware of your experience. You likely have what type of power on this project?
You are the project manager for GHB Project. You have served as a project manager for your organization for the past 10 years. Practically all of your projects come in on time and on budget. The project team has worked with you in the past, and they consider you to be an expert project manager. They also like working with you. Given all of this, you likely have what type of power on this project?
Which of the following is an example of coercive power?
Mike is the project manager for a project with a very tight schedule. The project is running late, and Mike feels that he does not have time to consider CAPM/PMP Project Management Certification All-in-One Exam Guide 286 all the possible solutions that two team members are in disagreement over. He quickly decides to go with the team member with the largest amount of seniority. This is an example of which of the following?
You are a project manager in a projectized organization. Your job as a project manager can be described best by which of the following?
Of the following, which one is an example of noise?
You are the project manager for the JHG Project. Management has requested that you create a document detailing what information will be expected from stakeholders and to whom that information will be disseminated. Management is asking for which one of the following?
Which of the following will help you, the project manager, complete the needed communications management plan by identifying the stakeholders' communication needs?
You are the project manager for the JGI Project. You have 32 stakeholders on this project. How many communication channels do you have?
You are the project manager for the KLN Project. You had 19 stakeholders on this project and have added three team members to the project. How many more communication channels do you have now compared to before?
A memo has been sent to you, the project manager, the project team members, and the project customers from the project sponsor. In this instance, who is the encoder?
Which one of the following is an example of a project communication constraint?
Project managers can present project information in many different ways. Which one of the following is not a method a project manager can use to present project performance?
Of the following, which term describes the pitch and tone of an individual's voice?
You are the project manager of the KMH Project. This project is slated to last eight years. You have just calculated EVM and have a cost variance (CV) of -$3,500, which is outside of the acceptable thresholds for your project. What type of report is needed for management?
You are presenting your project performance to your key stakeholders. Several of the stakeholders are receiving phone calls during your presentation, and this is distracting from your message. This is an example of what?
You are the project manager for the OOK Project. You will be hosting project meetings every week. Of the following, which one is not a valid rule for project meetings?
What percentage of a message is sent through nonverbal communications, such as facial expressions, hand gestures, and body language?
When does lessons-learned identification take place?
Why should a project team complete lessons-learned documentation?
You are the project manager for the PMU Project. Your project has 13 members. You have been informed that next week your project will receive the seven additional members you requested. How many channels of communication will you have next week?
Performance reporting should generally provide information on all of the following, except for which one?
The process of sending information from the project manager to the project team is called what?
George is the project manager of the 7YH Project. In this project, George considers the relation between himself and the customer to be of utmost importance. Which one of the following is a valid reason for George's belief in the importance of this relationship?
Which one of the following means that communications occur? PART II
When is it appropriate to accept a project risk?
Frances is the project manager of the LKJ Project. Which of the following techniques will she use to create the risk management plan?
You are the project manager of the GHK Project. You and the manufacturer have agreed to substitute the type of plastic used in the product to a slightly thicker grade should there be more than 7 percent error in production. The thicker plastic will cost more and require the production to slow down, but the errors should diminish. This is an example of which of the following?
An organization's risk tolerance is also known as what?
The customers of the project have requested additions to the project scope. The project manager notifies you that additional risk planning will need to be added to the project schedule. Why?
Which one of the following best describes the risk register?
_______________________ include(s) fire, theft, or injury, and offer(s) no chance for gain.
Complete this sentence: A project risk is a(n)______________________ occurrence that can affect the project for good or bad.
When should risk identification happen?
You are the project manager of the KLJH Project. This project will last two years and has 30 stakeholders. How often should risk identification take place?
Which one of the following is an acceptable tool for risk identification?
You are the project manager for a project that will create a new and improved Web site for your company. Currently, your company has over eight million users around the globe. You would like to poll experts within your organization with a simple, anonymous form asking about any foreseeable risks in the design, structure, and intent of the Web site. With the collected information, subsequent anonymous polls are submitted to the group of experts. This is an example of _________________________________.
Which risk analysis technique provides the project manager with a risk ranking?
A table of risks, their probability, impact, and a number representing the overall risk score is called a ____________________________.
You are presented with the following table: Risk Event Probability Impact Cost/Benefit EMV 1 .20 4,000 2 .50 5,000 3 .45 -300 4 .22 500 5 .35 4,500 What is the EMV for Risk Event 3?
You are presented with the following table: Risk Event Probability Impact Cost/Benefit Ex$V 1 .35 4,000 2 .40 50,000 3 .45 -300,000 4 .30 50,000 5 .35 45,000 Based on the preceding numbers, what is the amount needed for the contingency fund?
The water sanitation project manager has determined that the risks associated with handling certain chemicals are too high. He has decided to allow someone else to complete this portion of the project, and so PART II has outsourced the handling and installation of the chemicals and filter equipment to an experienced contractor. This is an example of which of the following?
A project manager and the project team are actively monitoring the pressure gauge on a piece of equipment. Sarah, the engineer, recommends a series of steps to be implemented should the pressure rise above 80 percent. The 80 percent mark represents what?
You are presented with the following table: Risk Event Probability Impact Cost/Benefit Ex$V 1 .20 4,000 2 .50 5,000 3 .45 -300 4 .22 500 5 .35 4,500 6 What would Risk Event 6 be based on the following information: Marty is 60 percent certain that he can get the facility needed for $45,000, which is $7,000 less than what was planned for.
Which of the following can determine multiple scenarios, given various risks and the probability of their impact?
Which of the following may be used as a risk mitigation tool?
You are the project manager for the 89A Project. You have created a contract for your customer. The contract must have what two things?
The project scope statement can help a project manager create procurement details. Which one of the following best describes this process?
Yolanda has outsourced a portion of a project to a vendor. The vendor has discovered some issues that will influence the cost and schedule of its portion of the project. How must the agreement be updated?
The United States backs all contracts through which of the following? Chapter 12: Introducing Project Procurement Management 373
Terry is the project manager of the MVB Project. She needs to purchase a piece of equipment for her project. The accounting department has informed Terry PART II that she needs a unilateral form of contract. Accounting is referring to which of the following?
The purpose of a contract is to distribute between the buyer and seller a reasonable amount of what?
Privity is what?
Sammy is the project manager of the DSA Project. He is considering proposals and contracts presented by vendors for a portion of the project work. Of the following, which contract is least risky to the DSA Project from Sammy's perspective?
In the following contract types, which one requires the seller to assume the risk of cost overruns?
Benji is the project manager of the PLP Project. He has hired an independent contractor for a portion of the project work. The contractor is billing the project $120 per hour plus materials. This is an example of what?
Mary is the project manager of the JHG Project. She has created a contract statement of work (SOW) for a vendor. All of the following contribute to the creation of the contract statement of work, except for which one?
You are the project manager for a software development project for an accounting system that will operate over the Internet. Based on your research, you have discovered that it will cost you $25,000 to write your own code. Once the code is written, you estimate you'll spend $3,000 per month updating the software with client information, government regulations, and maintenance. A vendor has proposed to write the code for your company and charge a fee based on the number of clients using the program every month. The vendor will charge you $5 per month per user of the Web-based accounting system. You will have roughly 1,200 clients using the system per month. However, you'll need an in-house accountant to manage the time and billing of the system, so this will cost you an extra $1,200 per month. How many months will you have to use the system before it is better to write your own code than to hire the vendor?
Henry has sent the ABN Contracting Company a letter of intent. This means what?
Martha is the project manager of the MNB Project. She wants a vendor to offer her one price to do all of the detailed work. Martha is looking for which type of document?
Which one of the following is true about procurement documents?
In what process group does the select seller process happen?
You have an emergency on your project. You have hired a vendor who is to start work immediately. What contract is needed now?
You are the project manager for a seller and are managing another company's project. Things have gone well on the project, and the work is nearly complete. There is still a significant amount of funds in the project budget. The buyer's representative approaches you and asks that you complete some optional requirements to use up the remaining budget. You should do what?
A tornado has wrecked your construction project. The tornado is known as what?
You are the project manager of the JKN Project. The project customer has requested that you inflate your cost estimates by 25 percent. He reports that his management always reduces the cost of the estimates, so this is the only method to get the monies needed to complete the project. Which of the following is the best response to this situation?
You are the project manager for the BNH Project. This project takes place in a different county than where you are from. The project leader from this country presents a team of workers that are only from his family. What should you do?
You are about to begin negotiations on a new project that is to take place in another country. Which of the following should be your guide on what business practices are allowed and discouraged?
One of your project team members reports that he sold pieces of equipment because he needed to pay for his daughter's school tuition. He says that he has paid back the money by working overtime without reporting the hours worked so that his theft remains private. What should you do?
You are the project manager of the SUN Project. Your organization is a functional environment, and you do not get along well with the functional manager leading the project. You are in disagreement with the manager on how the project should proceed, the timings of the activities, the suggested schedule, and the expected quality of the work. The manager has requested that you get to work on several of the activities on the critical path even though you and she have not solved the issues concerning the project. What should you do?
PMI has contacted you regarding an ethics violation of a PMP candidate. The question is in regards to a friend that said he worked as a project manager under your guidance. You know this is not true, but to save a friendship, you avoid talking with PMI. This is a violation of what?
You are the project manager for the Log Cabin Project. One of your vendors is completing a large portion of the project. You have heard a rumor that the vendor is losing many of its workers due to labor issues. In light of this information, what should you do?
You are the project manager for the PMH Project. Three vendors have submitted cost estimates for the project. One of the estimates is significantly higher than similar project work in the past. In this scenario, you should do what?
You are the project manager of the LKH Project. This project must be completed within six months. The project is two months into the schedule and is starting to slip. As of now, the project is one week behind schedule. Based on your findings, you believe that you can make some corrective actions and recover the lost time over the next month to get the project back on schedule. Management, however, requires weekly status reports on cost and schedule. What should you do?
As a contracted project manager, you have been assigned a project with a budget of $1.5 million. The project is scheduled to last seven months, but Chapter 13: PMP Code of Professional Conduct 385 your most recent earned value management (EVM) report shows that the project will finish ahead of schedule by nearly six weeks. If this happens, you will lose $175,000 in billable time. What should you do?
You are the project manager of the PMH Project. You have been contracted to design the placement of several pieces of manufacturing equipment. You have completed the project scope and are ready to pass the work over to the installer. The installer begins to schedule you to help with the installation of the manufacturing equipment. You should do what?
You are the project manager of the 12BA Project. You have completed the project according to the design documents and have met the project scope. The customer agrees that the design document requirements have been met; however, the customer is not pleased with the project deliverables and is demanding additional adjustments be made to complete the project. What is the best way to continue?
You are the project manager of the AAA Project. Due to the nature of the project, much of the work will require overtime between Christmas and New Year's Day. Many of the project team members, however, have requested vacation during that week. What is the best way to continue?
You are a project manager for your organization. Your project is to install several devices for one of your company's clients. The client has requested that you complete a few small tasks that are not in the project scope. To maintain the relationship with the client, you oblige her request and complete the work without informing your company. This is an example of what?
You are completing a project for a customer in another country. One of the customs in this country is to honor the project manager of a successful project with a gift. Your company, however, does not allow project managers to accept gifts from any entity worth more than $50. At the completion of the project, the customer presents you with a new car in a public ceremony. What should you do?
You have a project team member who is sabotaging your project because he does not agree with it. What should you do?
You are the project manager of a project in Asia. You discover that the project leader has hired family members for several lucrative contracts on the project. What should you consider?
Of the following, which one achieves customer satisfaction?
A PMP has been assigned to manage a project in a foreign country. The disorientation the PMP will likely experience as he gets acclimated to the country is known as what?
You are the project manager for an information technology project. It has come to your attention that a technical problem has stopped the project work. How should you proceed?
Joel is managing a project.The project is about three fourths done when the site engineer reports that due to inherent complexities in a certain task the deliverables would get delayed.This would involve additional analysis and then implementation.He requests that this new work that was not envisioned earlier be added to the scope and also the time required be added to the schedule.You and the site engineer have analyzed the impact of this change to cost, and have written up a change request and requested approval from change control board.Just today you have received approval from the change control board what should be the imemdiate course of action ?
You are in charge of managing a software development project which is related to simulations for driving racing cars.In one of your team meetings it has been reported that a lot of issues have been reported in the air tunnel modelling module.On deeper analysis it is found that many of the issues could have been prevented had a simple code review checklist been used.You prepare a code review checklist and ensure the code is reviewed as per the checklist.This is a good example of :
Which of the following statements are not true regarding Network Diagrams?:
Which of the following is part of the Manage Quality process?
You are the project manager for a Project. You are updating the WBS during Define Activities, which is often called ________?
The Project Quality Management process must __________.
You are a project manager of a company and your project is currently in execution phase. The customer has requested you for additional work. This work will affect the budget, but not the schedule of the project. What should you do next?
You are the project manager and have decided to outsource a part of the project to a vendor. You have offered a bonus to the vendor if the work is completed in two months. This is an example of _____________.
You have replaced an earlier project manager in a project .The earlier project manager has left the prganization and you are now responsible for the project.On reviewing the project management plan you are disturbed because a number of procurement contracts have been signed and they all turn out to be Cost plus fixed fee types of contracts why are you worried ?
Your team is in its second month of development.You are managing a software development project for a banking product.In one of the team meetings a debate arises if defects found during Quality control need to undergo change control.Some team members are convinced that all defects should undergo change control while the other half is convinced that defects do not need to undergo change control.Which of the following statements are untrue ?
You are responsible for managing a project that deals with laying out a freeway connecting two major port cities.Progress on the project has been smooth and you and your team are very confident on completing the project well within the stipulated timelines.On reviewing you see that the project has also run below the budget resulting in savings.You decide to add an extra feature of reflector strips on the road every mile.You do a quick calculation and are satisfied that neither budget nor schedule will slip.You feel that by adding these extra features you could also bag some future projects as well.This is an example of :
You are in charge of a project that deals with laying out a lavish 18 hole golf course.The project work is in progress.You also have a number of contractors working on the project.Being an experienced manager you know that communication is key to success of the project.You have identified 10 stakeholders with whom you need to communicate.Due to some internal and external organizational changes at the client end three new stakeholders have been added with whom you need to communicate with.You also had to reduce one of the contractors with whom you were communicating.How many communication channels do you have now?
You are in charge of a project and to ensure things go well you have had monthly meetings with the stakeholders.The project is running on schedule and budget.You are in your fourth month of execution but the stakeholder indicates dissatisfaction with the deliverables.To make changes in the deliverables would mean a delay in the schedule.What would have been the most important process that could have prevented this situation?
The project that you are in charge has been successfully completed.The last of the deliverables have been formally accepted by the client.You had several contractors with whom contracts were prepared.With the project done you decide to communicate the completion details and closure of contracts.Which is the best form of communication?
Your company has bagged a number of government contracts dealing with setting up infrastructure.This includes setting up roads and bridges.This is a very big and prestigious project so your company would like to ensure everything is planned well in advance.You are the project manager of this project.Considering its importance you and your team come up with a list of risks.One of the subject matter experts indicates that during the months of July and August the construction work of the bridge across the river would need to stop on account of past history of flooding of the river.You agree with the expert and plan the schedule accordingly.What strategy did you just apply ?
You are in the process of defining activities and have broken down the WBS into individual activities.You now decide to uniquely tag each activity with a unique code.So here what you have done is defined an ___ for each Activity
You are managing a project that has teams located in different parts of the world.While the advantage of colocation is beneficial the team structure or locations cannot be changed.Being an experienced manager that you are you realize that without a proper communication channel can quickly lead to chaos.What would your choice of communication be?
Rather than use Triangular Distribution while doing Three Point Estimation you choose to use Beta Distribution.Based on your analysis and understanding you are confident that the project would be completed with a total cost of 108,000 $.You also estimate that a best case estimate would be 90000 $ while a worst case scenario would result in the costs incurred to shoot up to 138000 USD. What would the Three point Cost estimate be using Beta Distribution ?
You are developing strategies to effectively engage stakeholders throughout the project life cycle. What is process you are working on ?
You head the engineering department in your company.Lately you have observed that certain deliveries are mising the schedule.On closer scrutiny you observe this to be occurring with a specific team member.You decide to discuss it out with the team member.Initially the team member is reluctant to discuss but finally opens up and indicates that the cause of the delays is often different instructions coming in from you as well as the project manager.She indicates that at such times she is confused related to whose instructions to follow thereby causing delays what kind of an Organizational structure is this most likely to be ?
The release criteria includes:
As a project manager you have successfully delivered all project deliverables within stipulated timelines your senior management wants you to calculate the Cost of Quality as a project Manager what costs would you NOT consider while making this calculation ?
You and and your team have just created a schedule network diagram.You have come up with the estimates and have defined the durations and subsequently have identified the Critical Path.You now decide to do a 'Backward Pass' through the Schedule Network Diagram what would you be calculating ?
Of the following types of contracts which has the HIGHEST risk for the seller ?
What is the BEST use of a Work Authorization System ?
You are in charge of a software project and you are almost 40% complete.The project stakeholders want a [performance report to date.You had planned to use Earned Value Management methodology.You come up with the following numbers: EV = 100 AC = 300 PV = 150 BAC = 600 You and your team have faced numerous issues till now . However you choose to ignore the current work performance and decide to go with what was originally planned. Based on this information what would be the EAC for the project ?
Your team has delivered phase one to the client. Based on client feedback and issues found by client you decide to do some introspection to identify root causes so that the subsequent deliverables do not face the same issues.What techniques would you choose to apply ?
Over lunch you meet a colleague who is managing a large turnover project for setting up a chemical plant.Your colleague is worried because the client is being unreasonable and asking for changes that will have a severe impact to the scope schedule and also cost.The client is also not ready to absorb the additional impact to schedule and cost.She seeks your advise what should she do ?
You are managing a project to set up a brand new play area for the community.You and your team have been working as per plan and things are moving smoothly.Suddenly one of the stakeholders indicates that the play area must also include a sand pit.This was not originally planned for so you analyze the impact to the cost , schedule and scope.You then submit the change request to the Change control board for their approval.You have immediately received an approval what should your next step be ?
As a project manager you are expected to calculate the cost of Poor Quality the project work is in progress what costs would you consider ?
You are in charge of building a bridge across a river. All the initial groundwork and structural designs have been completed and work is in progress.You know that the next two months will be particularly critical involving some critical activities such as Arc welding of stiffener plates.You know your company employs welders who specialize in this kind of work.However you are apprehensive regarding their availability for the next two months.What should you refer to first to find if these welders are available for the next two months?
You and a group of managers who conduct a weekly meeting for sharing information and project management best practices.Joe who is a colleague of yours explains the need of correctly identifying all the project stakeholders.He explains that in his current project he has made use of Stakeholders Engagement Assessment Matrix.Many of the other colleagues are not quite aware of the need and usage of this matrix which of the following is the BEST choice ?
Your company policy allows you to gift customers within certain limit. By mistake, you have given a gift to the customer's representative already which is beyond the limit mentioned in your company policy. What should you do?
Earned Value Analysis is used to measure performance based on following parameters:
Which of the following statements are not true regarding Scope Verification ?
What is the purpose of fishbone diagram?
Which of the following best describes Vrooms Expectancy theory ?
You are managing a project that that your company won after making a bid.The clients have negotiated long and hard and have driven a hard bargain.The project is scheduled to span over eight months and you are in your fifth month of execution.You are extremely worried since you have about four more months of work remaining and the project is at the 'Point of total assumption' what does this mean ?
You are managing a project which involves building software for the aeronautical domain.The nature of the work is complex and needs a lot of research.During Quality assurance both the development team and testing team suggest that the quality assurance process be changed to also include White Box testing and not only rely on Black box testing.The team wants to make this shift in approach as they believe this would lead to better quality of deliverables what is the best course of action ?
The Scope Baseline consists of the following:
You are the project manager and decided to outsource a part of the project to a vendor. The vendor discovered some issues that impact the cost and schedule of its work. How does the vendor update the agreement?
As a manager on a project your key outlook is to ensure that the project delivers within the scheduled timelines with minimal rework and customer delight.For some time now the project work is proceeding smoothly with a CPI and SPI a perfect 1.One of your team members approaches you and indicates that she might possibly need a long vacation on personal grounds.She indicates this could possibly occur in two months from now.You look up the schedule and as luck would have it this team member happens to be scheduled to execute activities which are on the critical path and her absence in two months time would cause a delay in schedule.You decide to take some action and reschedule task allocation to ensure that this team member is not planned to work on any of the critical path activities.What did you just do ?
You are in the process of executing a project that deals with laying out electrical cables connecting two cities.You have been reporting progress on a monthly basis.In this month due to unplanned vacations many of the staff have not turned up at work.This has caused a delay in the schedule.You decide to check if the schedule variance is within the allowable threshhold what document should you refer to ?
Which of the following activities is not performed as a part of Project Closure ?
Of the following types of contracts which has the HIGHEST risk for the buyer ?
You are in charge of building a shopping portal.You are fairly confident as you have a team experienced in doing such work.As per the agreement at the end of the first month you organize a demonstration of the software.You invite the sponsor and key stakeholders.Later the sponsor informs you that she is not very happy with the progress indicating that one of the clients who would be using this software is not satisfied as her needs are not being met.To satisfy this client's needs would mean some radical changes with an impact to both cost and schedule.What could be the root cause of this issue?
Top-down estimating is also called _______ estimating.
The _________ is the international organization that controls the standards for quality.
Your company has won a large project for one of the fund houses to administer their funds.The project work has been going on smoothly and the customer has been singing praises about the work done so far.The client has planned a visit the next month to go over the plans for the next phase of the project as well as to meet with the project team.Your senior management realizes that this client could potentially need additional capabilities in the derivatives segment.Your company happens to have a strong exposure to this segment having executed numerous such projects.Your senior manager also invites key managers from the derivatives segment to showcase the organizations abilities in the derivates vertical this is an example of ?
Project Team has created sub plans for each activity in project plan. These plans are called :
You are in your third month of project execution which is expected to continue for a duration of 14 calendar months. Your sponsor has asked for a performance report. You decide to create a S curve. Based on the S curve you report your Actual Cost which is more than the Earned Value.Also the Planned Value is greater than the Earned Value. What would be the interpretation of this data ?
You have been asked to provide Cost estimates for a project which would be responsible for the complete electrical installation in warehouses. As a project manager you have had past experience in similar projects in your previous organization.The organization you have joined also has recently done a similar project and there is an urgency in providing the estimate as mandated by executive management so what estimation technique would you adopt ?
You are a project manager managing a project that has not been making good progress.Certain issues like a flash flood have significantly delayed the laying out of the plinth for the shopping complex.There have been a lot of escalations from key stakeholders and executive management is pressing for getting the project on track.In a review meeting your lead architect sensing the urgency suggests a change that could significantly decrease the schedule.She is very confident that the suggested change will work to get things on track. As a project manager what is the best course of action ?
You are in charge of managing a software development project which is related to simulations for driving racing cars.In one of your team meetings it has been reported that a lot of issues have been reported in the air tunnel modelling module.On deeper analysis it is found that many of the issues could have been prevented had a simple code review checklist been used.You decide to mandate usage of the code review checklist for all subsequent deliveries to ensure other deliveries are less issue prone. This is a good example of :
You are in charge of constructing a High Rise residential building.After creating a Network diagram you have identified the Critical Path. Work has started but suddenly due to inclement weather plinth work has got delayed. This plinth work activity was on the critical path . As a manager driving this project would you be worried and why ?
You know that the success of your project will be determined by how well you manage risks.You know that identifying risks upfront can help you be better prepared with risk response strategies.You discuss and consult with other project managers in the company.One manager suggests usage of SWOT to identify risks.What would you do next as a part of this technique ?
You have been assigned to a project that deals with developing a software product for the BFSI domain.You and your team are building the schedule network diagram.While sequencing activities one of the team members who is an Architect indicates that rather than interacting with the database on every activity we should introduce an activity which would cache the data.He argues that this will improve performance and hence this activity should be introduced in the sequence prior to the other activities that deal with database interaction. What kind of a dependency is this ?
You and your team are in the process of creating WBS and WBS Dictionary.What would be the BEST choice of attributes in a WBS Dictionary ?
Which of the following statements is NOT true regarding change log ?
What does S Curve depict a relationship between ?
Which of the following statements are false regarding Risk Management?
Which of the following statements is not true regarding a Contract ?
You are in charge of a project for the electrical layout of a 5 star hotel.You see this as a very simple project as you and your team have a lot of experience excuting similar such projects.As a result your organization has a wealth of Organizational Process assets.You have worked out the exact details of the work involved and have a very detailed WBS with granular level activities defined.You decide to employ the services of a contractor for laying out of the cable trays.What kind of a contract would be the best choice ?
Which hierarchical chart shows resources?
Your company has won a project to build a school playground with specific toys and a sandpit.The school has mandated that the project be completed prior to start of the school after Holidays .You review the plan and see that the estimated completion date is nearly a month after the desired completion date.As resources are sparse you do not have the option to add additional resources.However you see that the sand pit work can start in parallel to the play kits being installed.Your analysis tells you that by performing these activities in parallel the project would meet its schedule.This is an example of :
You are in charge of a project to build a bridge across a river.You are midway through the project.However due to changes in environmental laws the project can no longer proceed and would need to be terminated.Executive management has asked you to document the level of work completed for the project.This would be done in which of the processes ?
You have asked your team members to provide estimates of tasks.Based on the estimate provided you see a specific team member seems to have provided estimates on the higher side.You decide to discuss with the concerned team member.She replies that as she did not have an idea of how long it would take she had guessed the estimate and then to be on the safer side simply doubled it ! What is this known as ?
You are in the process of making cost estimates for a project.However detailed requirements are not yet available.A similar project was executed by your company and you decide to use the past projects historical data to come up with your estimates. This is called
You are the project manager for a large Project. You are currently busy with approximating number of work periods required to complete individual activities with estimated resources. Which of the following inputs do you need for this ?
You and your team are planning out the work to be done.You break up the work into discrete workpackages.To ensure that each work package has all the necessary details you and your team decide to write down detailed information for each work package such as Statement of work , details of the work package and who will be the responsible individual for the work package.Where would you store this information in ?
You are the project manager of a software project. You have just analyzed activity sequences, durations, resource requirements , schedule constraints and created project schedule. The above task belongs to which process?
You know that the success of your project will be determined by how well you manage risks.You know that identifying risks upfront can help you be better prepared with risk response strategies.So you decide to identify risks by taking help of experts.You have identified some good experts and rather than calling them into your office you send them questionnaires.You promise them complete anonymity so that they give unhindered responses.What information gathering technique are you adopting?
Which of the following best describes Achievement Theory of Motivation ?
The key benefits of ____________ process is that it will maintain or increase the efficiency and effectiveness of stakeholder engagement activities as the project evolves and environment changes.
You are managing a project constructing a bridge over a river.All of the risks have been identified and the design phase is just completed.The team is in its second week of actual construction.One of the subject matter experts reports that there is a possibility of the monsoons to be heavier this year.She points out that the load bearing plates earlier designed may have to be redesigned considering the additional water pressure expected because of additional rain water.What would be your best immediate course of action?
You are managing a project responsible for doing plantation on a large reserve land.You have created the schedule network diagram and have identified two paths. Path 1 consists of two activities of a duration of 2 and 5 weeks respectively.Path 2 consists of 3 activities with durations of 1 , 3 and 3 weeks respectively.Which of the two paths is the Critical Path ?
What is the role of the Project Manager in Procurement ?
As a manager in an organization which believes in the Theory X style of management which of the following describes correctly the assumptions of this theory ?
You have recently joined an organizations project management office.After reviewing the organizational assets you realize that project managers have not routinely documented lessons learned for their projects.There are a few projects that are about to start You decide to call up a meeting of all the project managers and explain the need of Lessons Learned.In order to get a buy in from your managers What would you focus on as the best use of this document
Your project is in a critical phase.You notice one of the team members comes in late into office and leaves early.This is clearly impacting delivery.You decide to discuss the details with the concerned team member to better understand the details.On discussion you find no specific reasons so you explain the necessity and criticality of the project expecting the team member improves.However next week your lead engineer reports about inadequate time being spent by the same person in office.What would be the best choice of communication in this case ?
Decomposition is best described as:
As a part of the Executive Management team you have a number of project managers reporting into you. One of the project managers has reported data for her project that has got you worried regarding health of the project. EV = 300000 USD , PV = 550000 USD , AC = 200000 USD You are worried since as per your calculations the project is behind schedule. However the Project Manager disagrees and she feels the project is ahead of schedule what is the correct interpretation of the data ?
To facilitate,measure and control Quality you have been asked to use the seven basic quality tools also known as 7QC tools which ones would they be ?
You have scheduled regular weekly team meetings with project team members.Things have been going to plan and there have been no variances till date with respect to the work performance baselines.A site engineer reports that he had to perform a couple of corrective actions however they were not logged as a Project Manager what should you do ?
You are negotiating with a contractor for additional staff augmentation a number of software developers and a few testers .As a buyer you dont quite have the exact statement of work ready.What kind of contract is MOST appropriate for this kind of work ?
A process with lack of consistency and predictability is called:
The _________ details the different tasks for members in the project.
ISO Stands for __________ ?
Your project activity float is negative 10. What is your course of action ?
The purpose of a quality audit is:
Which of the following statements are not true regarding the Scope Management Plan ?
You are the project manager of a project and you have added some dummy activities to correctly show all logical relationships Which network diagramming method have you used ?
You are in charge of a painting project for a high rise building.As part of the planning you need to take a decision of buy Vs lease for some stilt ladders needed on site.The cost of the ladder is 1000 $ and a daily cost of 4$ while the daily lease cost is 12$.If you were to lease the ladder what should be the duration to ensure your decision is correct ?
In which of the following situation network diagram is better than bar chart ?
Your company has been tasked with providing estimates for a road construction project. You have data available related to costs per square feet. You now need to provide an estimate of the cost of the project based on this data what estimation technique is most applicable in such a scenario ?
A data point in a control chart that requires investigation is called:
A Heuristics is best described as :
You have successfully completed a project.You have now been assigned a project which is midway into its execution.You have had to take this project due to non availability of the current project manager due to health.This is a complex project involving multiple contractors and teams at various geographical locations.You decide to look up the requirements of the types of reports and frequency of sending them.Where would you find this information?
You are managing a project and to ensure things run smoothly you have decided to provide project information periodically to all the stakeholders.You have decided that you would report against the baselines for scope , cost and schedule.Which of the following would be the best choice ?
You have replaced a project manager on a project that is already in the execution phase.The project is behind schedule and you have been specifically brought in to ensure the project meets its schedule.You decide to review the schedule network diagram created by the earlier project manager and you realize that the project is 3 weeks behind schedule. After reviewing the activities and the network diagram you decide to Crash the schedule.So this means you
Which of the following best describes the assumptions made by Herzberg's Hygiene theory ?
You are managing a software development project in the banking domain.Things have been proceeding as per plan but with the economic meltdown the client has had to abruptly shutdown the project due to lack of funds to source the projects any longer.As a Project manager what is the next thing to do ?
Which of the following statements is true regarding Critical Path?
Your company policy allows accepting gifts from customers within certain limit. Your customer is giving you a gift which is beyond the limit of your company policy. You have given a gift to the customer's representative already which has similar in value. What should you do?
You are responsible for a project with high risks particularly during the early phases your sponsor has asked for performance reports on a monthly basis. At the end of the first month you report a CPI greater than 1 and also the SPI greater than 1. What would this mean ?
You are the project manager of a software project. Your team member want to make technical changes to an activity which will add more time to that activity. What should you do ?
You have replaced an earlier project manager.The project is already in its third month of execution.You need to determine if the project is ahead or behind schedule.What would be the BEST source of this information ?
Communication can be of the following forms except:
With a lot of expertize in project management many of your companies co managers consult you for advise and inputs.One of your colleagues who is relatively inexperienced in managing projects wants to compare the project work and measure the deviations which document should he refer to ? Choose the option that BEST answers the question ?
As a manager on a project your key outlook is to ensure that the project delivers within the scheduled timelines with minimal rework and customer delight.For some time now the project work is proceeding smoothly with a CPI and SPI a perfect 1.One of your team members approaches you and indicates that she might possibly need a long vacation on personal grounds.She indicates this could possibly occur in two months from now.You look up the schedule and as luck would have it this team member happens to be scheduled to execute activities which are on the critical path and her absence in two months time would cause a delay in schedule.You decide to take some action and ask the team member to start regular knowledge transfers to a couple of trainees.Your thought is though the trainees would be relatively inexperienced they would more than make up for it with two people rather than one person to perform these tasks should this team member need to go on leave.What did you just do ?
You are a project manager of Software Product company. After a person is hired, you come to know that many of this person's ideas were developed by a competitor company. Are you going to implement the same ideas?
A product description of a project can help in creating procurement details. Which one of the following best describes the product description?
As a project manager of a project , you have just completed Schedule network diagram. Which of the following schedule management activities have you completed?
You are in the process of making a cost estimate for a large prestigious project. You decide to use the Three Point Estimation technique with Triangular Distribution. Based on your analysis and understanding you are confident that the project would be completed with a total cost of 108,000 $.You also estimate that a best case estimate would be 90000 $ while a worst case scenario would result in the costs incurred to shoot up to 138000 USD. What would the Three point Cost estimate be using Triangular Distribution ?
Midway through the project as a Manager you are performing Earned Value Methodology to report performance. Based on your calculations you realize that the initial plan is no longer valid.However you still need to provide an EAC what is the best course of action ?
As a manager on a project you have identified and created the WBS and WBS Dictionary.You also plan to ensure that each deliverable gets the blessings of your stakeholders and sponsors.Which process are you planning to perform?
You have received a number of seller responses for contracting work related to setting up office cubicles.One of the bids received happens to be from a very good friend of yours.You know she has done good work in the past.What should be the BEST course of action ?
In order to determine the details of the work to be performed in work packages which of the following can be used ?
You need to provide estimates for activities on the project.You and your team discuss and conclude that as detailed information is not yet available the best option would be to use Parametric Estimates.The various ways to create Parametric Estimates are:
Which of the following best describes the role of a project sponsor ?
You are a project manager for a project. While reviewing the cost estimates for the project, you notice that one of the cost estimates for an element in the WBS is 20% higher than the previous project for a very similar work. What should you do next?
You are the sponsor of a project which has just kicked off.This is an ambitious project to build a top of the line 18 hole golf course.Which of the following BEST describes your role as a sponsor ?
As a project manager of a project , you have just completed Schedule network diagram. What should you do NEXT in schedule management ?
The key difference between Work performance data and Work performance Measurement is :
The purpose of a contract is to distribute a reasonable amount of ____________between the buyer and seller.
A friend of yours approaches you seeking advice.She indicates she has offers from two organizations.Her role in one of the organization is that of a project Co-ordinator while in the other organization her role is that of a Project expediter.She is not quite clear of the difference between the two roles and seeks your advice.Which of the following statement is true ?
If a person desires to excel in his tasks as per Maslow's Hierarchy of Needs what type of a need is the person exhibiting ?
According to Theory Y style of management which of the following are correct assumptions ?
Conformance to specifications document is a description of:
You are the project manager of a marketing project and need to purchase some equipment. The accounting department needs a unilateral contract from you. Accounting is referring to which of the following:
You are out for lunch with a fellow project manager.She is in charge of a project that deals with laying out electrical cables across two towns.As you understand the plan of the layout you realize that the cabling would cover a neighborhood with a history of criminal problems.You advise your fellow team manager that it would be prudent to insure the copper cables through a theft insurance.You also advise her regarding which insurance companies would give her the best insurance covers against theft.What risk response strategy did you just adopt?
To Complete Performance Index is used to determine ?
You are managing a project and based on risk identification you feel very confident that the project should run smoothly.The next day the lead architect indicates a risk which was not envisioned.He indicates a 10% possibility of the risk occurring and the effort involved of choosing an alternate path worth 2000 USD.The side effect of alernate path implementation is that a lot of testing efforts would get reduced worth 4500 USD and the possibility being 30%.What would be the EMV ?
An estimate is required for a new project of an R and D nature and it has been decided to create the estimates using WBS with an emphasis on accuracy of the estimates.Your project manager also indicates sufficient time is being made available to provide the estimates what would be the best estimation approach in this case ?
Which of the following could not be provided with Activity Attributes
As a project manager you understand the importance of identifying all relevant stakeholders , their interest and influence and their needs and expectations.You have been assigned to handle a large construction project.You decide to do a thorough stakeholder analysis and you identify Laura and Sean.Based on your interactions and analysis you know that both Sean and Laura are low in the pecking order so they do not wield any significant authority or power.However where it differs is in their interest in the project.Laura has a lot of interest while Sean is disinterested . You decide to plot them in a Power / Interest grid to help determine how you would manage these stakeholders. Which of the following is the best approach to handle these two stakeholders ?
You are in charge of managing a software development project which is related to simulations for driving racing cars.During Quality Assurance a number of issues have been reported in the air tunnel modelling module.On deeper analysis it is found that many of the issues were due to not understanding the requirements clearly and now additional time would be expended to fix the issues identified. This is a good example of :
Which of the following is NOT part of a quality plan?
As a senior member in the executive management team you have tasked project managers within your team to provide cost estimates for a huge project. You easily forsee the cost estimate of the project to run into millions of dollars.Along with the cost estimate you are also expecting the Basis of estimates. What would you expect to be included in the documentation for Basis of estimates ?
Your team has just bagged a software development project.The executive management is very pleased as this is a very prestigious project.However you are a little worried considering the complex nature of the project.You decide to try and identify the possible risks.You get all relevant stakeholders together and conduct mammoth discussions.Together you have come up with a number of risks.However based on your experience you still feel that not all the risks have been identified.You decide to set aside some budget for the risks that you have not identified but are sure you will encounter.Where does this budget come from?
You have been assigned to manage a project that deals with setting up a railway line connecting two cities.The project is complex with a lot of contracting involved.You and experts in your organization are evaluating if the rail line alignment machinery should be purchased outright or if it would be better to lease.The cost of leasing the equipment is 1200 $ per day while the cost of an outright purchase is 96000 $ and a daily cost of 200 $.The duration of laying out the railway lines is scheduled to be an activity duration of 150 days.Should you purchase the machinery or be leased which option would be more economical ?
An activity has an Early Start(ES) of 5 days and Late Start of 16 days.What is the activity's float ?
Which of the following statements are not true regarding WBS ?
You are in charge of a project that is running behind schedule.Your lead architect approaches you and indicates that should he introduce a change the project could possibly catch up on lost time.What should be the FIRST thing you should do?
You are in a very happy state today as you have completed all the deliverables.This was a complex project involving a lot of challenges but with good management and a motivated team things have been completed successfully.What should you do next as a project manager ?
Your company has won a prestigious project which deals with building software to be used on spaceships landing on the moon.After building the schedule network diagram you identify the critical path and also a number of Near-Critical Paths.What does this mean with respect to Risks related to Project Schedule ?
You and and your team have just created a schedule network diagram.You have come up with the estimates and have defined the durations and subsequently have identified the Critical Path.You now decide to do a 'Forward Pass' through the Schedule Network Diagram what would you be calculating ?
You and your team have done extensive brainstorming and discussions.You have also looked up the Organizations process assets and have come up with an exhaustive list of risks.You and your team members feel fairly confident now that you know all the risks.You decide to priorotize the risks and only focus on the high priority ones.A team member indicates that a large number of risks have very low priority.She suggests we simply ignore them.You disagree and decide to maintain a list of such low priority risks.Where will you maintain these low priority risks ?
All of the following are false regarding the project scope statement:
A software development project has been awarded to one of the many vendors.Your company and the vendor have agreed to build this project using the Waterfall Methodology. You decide to check with the progress regarding when development will start. The Vendor informs you that the actual Development can only start after completion of the Design.Which type of relationship best describes the dependency between Design and actual Development ?
Your friend who works as a project manager in a pharmaceutical company meets you over dinner.You see a drastic change in his temperament as compared to when you last met him.He seems dejected and complains that in his present organization as a project manager he has almost no authority and hardly any decision making ability.What kind of an organizational structure does your friend work in ?
A weighted average duration estimate to calculate duration is called :
Which type of relationship is often used in Precedence Diagramming Method ( PDM ) ?
You are managing a project related to building a skyscraper.However as per regulations no work can be started till the government body has approved and provided necessary clearance.This is an example of what kind of dependency ?
The primary benefit of meeting Quality Requirements are ( Choose all that apply )
Which of the following statements is TRUE regarding Fixed Price Contract
Control chart helps:
You are managing a project that is responsible for setting up an alcohol distillery.Your team is in its eighth month of execution.One of the vendors informs you that the agitators delivery is going to be delayed by a week .You look up the project management plan and the schedule baselines and decide to set up all the reactors first.Based on your analysis by moving tasks around you see that there would be no impact to any of the performance measurement baselines.What should you do next ?
Which of the following statements are true regarding Control Account ?
Given a project which reports a CPI less than 1 you have asked one of your managers to generate the TCPI what formula should the project manager use in this case ?
In which process "meeting" is not used as Tools and Techniques.
While planning for a project you decide to keep a good grip over project risks.You and your team members have come up with the list of possible risks and would now like to prioritize them based on their probability and impact.This activity would take place in which process?
Which hierarchical chart shows all the tasks in a list ?
Which of the following is NOT part of the Control Quality process?
You have a team of project managers reporting to you.Recently a new manager relatively inexperienced has joined your team.Considering his level of experience you assign him to a small project.Considering low complexity and few stakeholders involved you envision the project to have no surprises or hiccups.You have identified the number of communication channels to be only 6.However with increase in scope of work 2 additional stakeholders who need to be communciated with join the team.You ask the manager to identify the number of communication channels now.The correct answer is :
You are managing a project which is in its first month of execution.In one of the meetings with a key stakeholder the stakeholder asks for some changes to be made in the current ongoing work.The stakeholder is asking for the change to be implemented imediately. You realize that the changes being asked for will need the Project Management Plan and the Scope baseline to be updated which have already been baselined As a Project manager what is the BEST course of action ?
Comparing target dates with the actual or forecast start and finish dates is called :
You are in charge of a large software development project.As a part of the project schedule it was planned to complete two core components by the end of October.You are now in August and you realize that the project is falling behind schedule.You do a quick review and decide that the schedule can be met by adding additional staff to the activities on the critical path. This is an example of :
You are in the process of determining how long it would take to complete your project. What would be the best tool to use in this case ?
A project is overbudget when
You and your team have worked hard and are about to successfully deliver the project.The customer is also happy with the deliverables and overall everyone is happy with how the project was delivered.You have written up the prformance reviews of each individual in the project team .As a Project Manager in your current organization you know that the team will get disbanded and in the next project you may not get the same team members who so successfully delivered the current project.What kind of Organization Structure does this represent?
The process of communicating and working with the stakeholders to meet their expectations, address issues and foster appropriate stakeholder engagement in project activities throughout project lifecycle is called ____________?
Choose all that are true regarding Management Reserves and Contingency Reserves
You are managing a project that is scheduled to un for an entire year.Things were looking good after the first two months.However due to some mistakes made by the construction crew at the end of the third month you realize that the expected work to be completed at this stage is not complete.As a result the project is behind schedule and is also over budget.However there are stiff penalties in the contract should the project not complete within the stipulated timelines.Your senior management as a result has committed to additional staff to the project if required.What would be the Estimate at Completion for this project ?
One of your project managers reports that her project has hit a roadblock.You are surprised since just the week before on reviewing the project everything seemed to be on track.She explains that a team member has identified a problem which was never envisioned in the risk identification process.Based on the analysis the impact would be to the cost to rectify the issue.What would be the best course of action?
Of the following baselines which is not a part of the Project Management Plan ?
A company wants to hire a PMP, and you are applying for the position in the company. You are scheduled to take the PMP exam in a few days. At your interview, a comment is made implying that you are PMP certified. What do you do?
A project is reporting a negative Cost Variance what does this mean ?
Which of the following is not a Risk Identification tool or technique ?
As a project manager of a large product you and your team have shipped the deliverables to your customer.However the customer has reported a number of serious issues in the quality of deliverables as a result of which the cost of quality of your project is deemed high. In the above scenario which type of cost would have caused the cost of quality to increase ?
Project Quality Management includes:
A relatively new project manager joins your company.You have assigned her to handle a project that deals with laying out of electrical cables.One day she informs you that some government body has been sending her a lot of queries related to the project and its layout.It seems that the government body was not considered as a stakeholder by her.You decide to review the list of identified Stakeholders so you ask her to provide you with the comprehensive list where should this information be found ?
A project is in execution.A team member approaches the project manager and indicates that she is not sure of what work she needs to perform.Which document would be the best source of this information ?
Which of the following statement is true regarding Procurement Documents
You have a large complex project to deliver and you are evaluating different motivational strategies to motivate your team to get the job done. You subscribe to the belief that to get things done and to motivate staff they must be rewarded with monetary rewards.You believe that by rewarding employees they would get motivated which of the following motivational theories are you applying ?
Which of the following statement is NOT true regarding starting a project without a charter ?
A project is ahead of schedule when
You are in charge of a software project and you are almost 40% complete.The project stakeholders want a [performance report to date.You had planned to use Earned Value Management methodology.You come up with the following numbers: EV = 300 AC = 100 PV = 150 BAC = 600 ETC 300 You and your team are very confident of continuing at the same rate as till now . The project has not faced any major issues and you and your team's confidence level is high that the project would complete without any hiccups. Based on this information what would be the EAC for the project ?
As a project manager you understand the importance of identifying all relevant stakeholders , their interest and influence and their needs and expectations.You have been assigned to handle a large construction project.You decide to do a thorough stakeholder analysis and you identify Bob and Kelly.Based on your interactions and analysis you know that Bob wields a lot of authority and also has a huge interest in the project.Kelly too wields a lot of power but is largely uninterested . You decide to plot them in a Power / Interest grid to help determine how you would manage these stakeholders. Which of the following is the best approach to handle these two stakeholders ?
Regarding Rolling Wave Planning which of the following statements are true choose all that apply ?
You have worked in the current organization and from managing projects you have now graduated to portfolio management and have a number of project managers reporting into you.Your company has bagged a prestigious project of a very similar nature to the one you had executed some years back.You ask the current project manager to look up the lessons learned for the past project where would these be stored ?
Your company has just bagged a project for electric cable layout and routing for a large shopping complex and you have been tasked with providing the cost estimates.You choose to rely on your past experience of similar such projects.You breakdown the costs of the cables per foot and unit cost of cable trays.What type of cost estimating technique are you relying on?
When does Scope Verification Occur ?
Which of the following statements below is NOT true regarding differences between administrative closure and contract closure ?
You are responsible for managing a project that deals with laying out a freeway connecting two major port cities.Progress in the past has been smooth but lately in the past few months you have observed a schedule and budget overrun.You decide to hold a meeting with your team members.On discussions you realize team members went ahead and made changes at the behest of the client requests on site.You are pretty sure the changes were not a part of the project scope statement this is an example of:
You are part of a Quality Assurance team and have scheduled a Quality Audit for one of the projects what would not be a goal or objective of performing this audit ?
As per Maslows theory of Hierarchy of needs which is the correct order of needs?
You have just completed developing the Schedule Network Diagram for a project that deals with building super sonic state of the art Jet planes.You have identified your critical path which includes building a wind tunnel.You see that in addition there is another path which deals with building the tail of the plane whose duration is close to the critical path.You also notice considerable floats on the other paths.You now need to assign resources to the tasks you have a few team members who are highly skilled and a team of resources who are relatively inexperienced.What would be the best course of action while assigning resources ?
John who is a software programmer is developing a framework for calculating equity prices.He comes up with an idea that would give very accurate calculations and discusses it with his manager.His manager likes the idea but realizes that this would cause an impact to the original effort estimate and thereby impact the business objectives as stated in the project charter.He goes ahead and updates the Project charter.Should he have updated the charter ? Choose the MOST appropriate answer
What is the purpose of the Project Charter ?
The five process groups of the Project Management Life cycle are, in order:
You have just started a new position as a project manager with your new company. Upon starting your job you are informed by the line manager that all budgetary decisions rest with her and that all key project decisions will be her responsibility as well. Most likely, PMI would say you are functioning as a ______________?
The project manager that you just hired said that she came from a Projectized organization prior to working for your company. Your VP just asked you what that means in terms of her level of authority. You responded:
The company you are working for has decided to adopt Scrum as a project management method. You've never heard of Scrum before but decide to do some research and discover that Scrum is an agile method. What kind of project phase method is being adopted here?
Two junior project managers who are working on the same project are having a heated discussion (an argument) on the difference between the project management life cycle and the project life cycle. The first project manager is saying there is essentially no difference between the two while the second project manager is saying that there is a significant difference between the two. While this debate is occurring, a senior vice president from your division interrupts the two and asks them the following question: "When the project is completed what is the expected lifetime of the deliverable?" Essentially, what is the vice president asking them?
What is the BEST definition for a project manager's role on the project?
A key disadvantage in the Projectized organization is frequently described as:
You have just gotten a new job within an organization that can't spell `project management' much less figure out how to run a project. Their project management process has been described by some in the organization as an 'adrenaline pounding thrill-ride usually resulting in a train wreck'. At your project kickoff meeting a number of the team members have expressed dismay at how the last project was managed and ask if this one will be just like the last one. In terms of the project approach, what is the BEST response you can offer?
The Director of Product Development and the chief engineer of the company have decided to add scope to the project you are managing. They have completed the necessary paperwork, received the required sign-offs and have told you to simply get it done. In this instance you are probably:
The project team has been arguing about what should go into the project management plan. They've built the same product over a hundred times before and have always been bothered that the project management plan never seemed to get completed. They were determined to get it done right this time. The team has come to you for advice regarding the project management plan. The most appropriate response you can give them is:
Management by Objectives is most successful when:
The portfolio manager from your division thought it might be helpful to the project teams if she delivered a short presentation on the elements in her portfolio. A number of team members, after receiving the email announcement for the presentation, come to you and ask if this meeting is worth their time. After all isn't a portfolio just a big project? As a Senior Project manager your best response would be:
The executives are debating about whether to implement a PMO for their organization. One of the executives thinks that PMO means 'project management overhead' while others are wondering about the actual value it will bring to the organization. As a senior project manager, they bring you in to the meeting on a consultative basis to help them get their hands around what value the PMO brings the organization. All of the following answers are correct except:
All of the statements about the project life cycle are true except which of the following:
You have contracted a third-party to install five rack-mounts and the server gear at your new data center for your new web service, which is designed to handle 50,000 simultaneous users. The performing organization stated you could have a custom-designed system and sit down with an architect to do that, however, they have a catalog of 10 systems that they can build from the simplest to the most complex. If you want to pick something from the catalog, the configuration is well known and well understood, and their installation time can literally be cut in half, saving you considerable funds. You selected one of the 10 catalog systems because there was one that coincided with your needs to a 99% level. You also assigned a senior project manager from your organization to coordinate all activities with the vendor for installation. A week later you hear the project manager having a heated discussion with one of the junior project managers about whether this installation constitutes a project or operations. The junior project manager maintains that the installation is time bound and delivers a unique product process or result and by definition, is a project. The Senior Project manager counters with the following argument: it is fundamentally operations because the performing organization does this all the time. The configuration selected came out of a catalog which means that the installation is a repetitive, predictable, and repeatable process which is why they could do it on such a narrow fixed-price basis. What is the best response you could give to the junior and senior project manager?
All of the following reasons elaborate why is it important for the project manager to consider stakeholder influence on a project, except for which of the following?
The organization wants you to manage a project with a very aggressive timeline. You have done an initial assessment of the statement of work, the timeline, resource availability, and the budget. Based on this (c) 2009-2013 Richard Perrin Evolutionten : Project Life cycle and Organization 2-22 information you have reported back to senior management at their aggressive timeline is a fiction and it will be impossible to meet given the scope of work. Senior management then asks you what the most effective project phase approach would be employed to compress the timeline given that the project is fraught with many uncertainties, risks and is something that the organization has never tried before. The most likely response you would give to address this situation is:
Several junior programmers ask you about the difference between the product life cycle and the project life cycle. The best answer that you can give them in describing the difference between the two is:
You have just collected project information from stakeholders and are analyzing their input with the project team. One stakeholder is worried about whether the organization has the proper skill sets inhouse to deliver the product of the project. This can be best described in project management terms as:
You are the program manager for a large multimillion dollar program managing 10 projects, each with a project manager. Because of the varying complexity of the projects, there are at least three different project life cycle types are being used across the 10 projects. Some of the project managers are discussing whether the project management life cycle needs to change to adjust to different project life cycles. The most correct answer that you can give them is:
You are managing a project in which the organization utilizes the 'waterfall approach' in executing projects. They have adopted the PMI 'methodology' and the IPECC approach has become the foundation for their internal project methodology. Senior management has approached you and has insisted that you use the phased approach as defined by PMI in delivering the project: initiate, plan, execute, monitor and control, and close (IPECC). What is the most factual information you can give senior management regarding IPECC process groups?
What is the primary goal of the Initiating process group?
Verify Scope is part of what process group?
The completion of work packages, holding meetings, distributing Project information, negotiating contracts and performing quality assurance are all part of what process group?
The Planning process group touches all nine of the key knowledge areas in that planning has to occur in each of these areas. Which of the following is not part of the planning process?
You are a senior project manager at a company that has just hired several junior project managers. Part of your job is to mentor these junior project managers so that they can rapidly become effective in the organization. Each of these junior project managers is a PMP(R) so you are reasonably sure that they understand the PMI framework. You decide to find out how deep their knowledge goes and ask them, "How many of the processes in the key knowledge areas do we use all the time?" Which junior PM gave the best answer?
In the Monitoring and Controlling process group, one of the primary goals of that group is to monitor and control the project work. What is the second equally important, major goal of the monitoring and control process?
You are just initiating a project for your organization. Which of the following is a true statement regarding the Initiating process?
Your project is in the planning phase and many of the stakeholders are excited about the product that will be delivered once the project is done. You have solicited input from the stakeholders, addressed technical issues with the technical team, estimated costs, determined the high-level project schedule, created a statement of work, created a work breakdown structure, identified and quantified risks, developed the project management plan and all subsidiary key knowledge area plans, and received stakeholder sign off of the plan. What is the next thing you will most likely do?
In the Executing process group the main goal is to direct and manage project execution. All of the following are elements in the executing process group with one exception:
When does the Closure process occur?
The project you are managing includes many stakeholders, geographically distributed across the country. As part of the planning process you have put together a communications plan that will address the communications needs of all the stakeholders on the project, from the performing organization up to and including the sponsor. Part of this communications plan includes the distribution of information as well as reporting the performance of the team. The PMI process groups you are utilizing are:
You are engaged in a large project that requires complex coordination between many departments in your organization. You have almost completed the planning phase and are looking for sign-off of the project management plan. You have addressed overall project integration activities, the budget, the timeline, the scope of the work, quality planning, resource acquisition, communications for a distributed team, and some procurement activities that require the use of external vendors. What has the project manager forgotten to do?
There are many reasons for creating a lessons learned document in a project. All of the following represent reasons why you would create a lessons learned document with the exception of:
You have been brought into a project for a 'project rescue'. Management had issues with the previous project manager and dismissed him from the company. You sit down with the project team for the first time and discover that there is a lot of activity going on and that the project is well under way: the requirements have been completed and design work is about half way done. However, there is a lot of contention between the members of the performing organization. A number of people are arguing about who should handle what activities, how long they are going to take, and in what order the activities should occur. From listening to these arguments it becomes clear to you that the prior project manager probably did not do what?
The team has completed all design work and is ready to start creating a product of the project. There are construction and IT elements in this project, and the project manager has leaned heavily on the subject matter experts in the organization for their technical expertise and know-how. You have determined that some of the work needs to be contracted to an external vendor who has the necessary expertise to deliver what is needed for the project. You are in the process of selecting a vendor. What process group are you in?
All the following happen in the Initiating process with the exception of:
You are deep in the planning process for your project and have created a human resource plan in which you have identified what skill sets are needed, when they are needed, and when they will roll off the project. You are now focused on the process of acquiring, developing, and managing the project team. Which of these processes occur in the monitoring and controlling process group?
Within the Project Time Management knowledge area, in what order do the planning activities occur before you can develop the project schedule?
One of the Junior Project managers you're mentoring has come to you for help. She just started the planning process and sat down with the key stakeholders to begin the requirements collection activities for her project. At the end of the meeting the stakeholder who will be receiving the deliverable stated that he wanted to see a definitive budget estimate for the project within one week of the completion of the requirements collection process. She explained that might not be possible because the team will not have had enough detail at that point to construct a solid estimate. He said he didn't care and that he needed the estimate for the capital budgeting meeting that is occurring at the end of the month two weeks from now. What is the best advice you can give your Junior Project manager?
Where do lessons learned activities occur?
What is a synonym for 'progressive elaboration'?
You are managing a program to recruit new project managers for your organization. You have just completed a training session in which you have identified the five process groups in the PMI framework and just asked the class the following question: "What is the purpose of the initiating process group?" Which of the student responses was the best answer?
What is the key primary benefit of the monitoring and controlling process group?
In an organization that uses 'hit or miss' project processes, they have come to you for advice on which of the five PMI process groups would be the best one to implement, if they had to boil it down to just one. What is the best advice you could give them?
You are a project manager in an organization with a strong PMO. One of the newly hired project managers told you that he has been a PMP(R) since 1998. While perusing the PMI website looking for some standards documentation, you happen to do a lookup on this person and find out that they are not in the PMI repository of PMP(R)s in good standing. What do you do?
Your project team is assembling a business case for the current project you have been assigned. You and the team are discussing various benefit measurement approaches for the project. Which of the following benefit measurement methods will help you build the strongest business case?
The project has been running smoothly; initiation phase is complete and the team is working on all aspects of planning. You had meetings with stakeholders several times to collect requirements and as a result, requirements documentation is almost complete, as are high-level and detailed design documents. As construction begins on the project, several stakeholders have indicated the need for changes to the requirements set. They are claiming these elements were missed in the initial requirements collection process, and they want you to add these elements to the project immediately. You perform an impact assessment and get it back to them only to hear that they are not going to allow any changes in the project budget or the timeline to complete these additional elements. What is the most effective tool that you could use to prevent this instance of scope creep?
Opportunity costs are defined as:
Which of the following is true about change requests that result in corrective or preventive actions?
The project you are managing involves 11 different teams scattered geographically across the country. The project sponsor is worried about how the work of 11 non-co-located teams is going to be coordinated for the project. You assure the sponsor that all relevant documentation will be captured in the corporate PMIS (project management information system). Within what key input does the PMIS reside?
The most critical activity of the project manager on the project is to:
You are managing a high visibility project with an aggressive deadline. The team has been burning extra hours every week in order to bring in the project on time everyone is tired and is looking forward to a break after the product is delivered to the client. The deliverable was finally completed and passed through user acceptance testing at your location without a hitch. The product was handed off to the installation team and the installation team installed the product at the client site. Unfortunately when they attempted to use the product, there was a major system crash that caused an abrupt halt in their production cycle. This installation represented a major upgrade from a previous installation of the same product, and while the first installation worked very well, this installation `crashed and burned'. What is the most likely cause of the problem at the client site?
All the following statements about Approved Change Requests are true except which of the following?
You are working as a PMP(R) for a company that typically does not implement charters for projects. As a result, an unusually high number of projects in this organization fail on a yearly basis. You've just been placed on a high visibility project as the senior project manager and begin to work on elements of the charter with the project sponsor. Senior management doesn't understand why you're wasting your time on this activity. What is the best thing you can do in this situation?
The project management plan is complete and is ready to be baselined. However, a key stakeholder just discovered a critical omission and requests an adjustment to the PM plan. What should you do next as the project manager?
The project management plan is baselined when:
Senior management has asked for an update on your project's budget and deliverables. This information will be contained in:
Who can approve of changes to any of the primary constraints on your project such as scope, budget, or timeline?
All of the following actions occur in the Direct and Manage Project Execution process except which of the following?
One of the key activities in The Monitor and Control Project Work Process is to implement corrective actions to bring future project performance back in line with the project management plan. What is the best explanation regarding PMI's philosophy on defect repair?
You represent one of five project teams that are sharing a facility to deliver a high visibility project for your organization. Since you are sharing a facility, your teams share the expenses for heat, light, electricity, and technical support. What type of cost does this represent?
Your organization has decided to train project managers on the use of the tool Microsoft Project, in the hopes that this will help them manage their projects more efficiently. Some of the more technically savvy people on the project management team have become very adept at many of the features contained in this tool performing what-if analyses, earned value measurements, network diagrams, resource calendars and more. One of the stakeholders asked to see the project management plan for their project and the project manager opened up Microsoft Project to show him the plan. PMI considers a tool like Microsoft Project to be closest to:
You and your project team have done a thorough analysis of the project and have computed the benefit cost ratio of the project at 1.7. In simplest terms this means: (c) 2009-2013 Richard Perrin Evolutionten : Project Integration Management 4-28
When deciding whether to do a project or not, computing NPV and IRR are supposed to result in essentially the same decision on whether to accept or reject the project. In fact, NPV and IRR are so closely related that IRR can be derived when NPV equals zero through the use of the following formula: = 0. There is, however, one instance when computing IRR may deliver conflicting results with NPV. How would you define such a situation?
You have delivered a product to a client on time, on budget, and to specification, however the client is not happy with the result. What is the next thing that should happen?
In terms of integrated change control, the project manager's primary responsibility is to do all the following except:
Which of the following is true regarding the project management plan?
The most commonly described key benefit of the project charter is:
You are analyzing the benefits of potential projects for your organization and have sat down at a meeting with the CFO and the rest of the finance team. In the course of the discussion one of the finance team members mentions that the organization has started to take a long view of project benefits. In other words, they are very concerned about the value of the projects not just in the immediate future, but 5 to 10 years from now. They want to make sure that an investment made now will be worth more 10 years from now than it is in today's dollars. What financial calculation would help them determine this?
A project at your organization is in trouble. Management has reassigned the project manager on the project and has given you the job of bringing it back in line. You have analyzed the prior project manager's project management plan, WBS, scope baseline and found that he actually did a good job. The problem was that there was an unusual amount of discovery on this particular project; it seems that management failed to address that the project had a high degree of risk and uncertainty greater than 40% risks that the prior project manager had raised on the project. When the PM raised those issues, management's position was "well, just do the best you can". This is a $5 million project which is approximately at its halfway point, but the budget expended is close to $3.5 million dollars at this point. The project is $1 million over budget and 10% behind schedule. Management is alarmed at the budget burn rate and is thinking of canceling the project, even though what has been accomplished so far is high quality work that has exceeded customer expectation. What is the best advice you can give management at this point?
The blueprints for the new construction projects have been completed and construction is ready to begin. While the organization was thinking about erecting a modular structure, they decided on a more traditional approach. The foundation will be poured and cured before the framing begins. This is an example of:
You have determined your project will optimistically take 24 weeks to complete, with a most likely completion date of 36 weeks and a pessimistic completion date of 72 weeks. Based on this three point estimate what is the likely completion timeline for the project?
A finish to finish relationship is defined as which of the following?
Rolling wave planning is a form of:
Management from the customer side wants to bring in a project one month earlier than they had originally planned. Based on the current project timeline, product testing will have to be cut short. You have reviewed several options with the customer; they have decided that crashing the schedule would be the best approach to bringing in the project earlier. As a result of customer's decision, what is your biggest concern using this approach?
The project optimistic estimate is 10 weeks and the pessimistic estimate is 40 weeks. What is the standard deviation of the estimate?
What is the most correct definition of the critical path in a network diagram?
While executing the project it becomes obvious that you're not going to hit your end date. The project may be delayed by at least two months. This may impact the start date of another project that was due to start right after yours completed. What type of float best describes this situation?
You have been discussing several estimating options with the project team. Some of the team members think that this particular project is similar to something that they worked on last year. However, the technical team has been quick to point out that there are some unknowns on this project that make parts of the project significantly different from last year's project. As the team starts performing a detailed analysis of the previous project, they uncover a great deal of historical information that would apply to the current project. In this situation the best estimating tool would be:
You have reached a point in your project were a major deliverable has been completed and submitted to the customer for approval. In a project timeline, this is typically called:
You and the project team are planning the work of the project. In addition to all of the planning activities that you're engaged in, part of the team has been reviewing the customer requirements, and has started to outline a work breakdown structure as well as create elements of the WBS dictionary, breaking down the work packages into smaller increments. The most accurate way of describing this is that you are creating:
The biggest disadvantage of the parametric estimate is?
You have been discussing a key deliverable with your customer. The discussion has centered on the accuracy and precision of the deliverable. Customer has indicated that due to the nature of the deliverable, a high level of precision is not really required. They have indicated to you that a precision of slightly less than 70% is adequate and acceptable. In terms of the Sigma reading, this number approximately translates to?
The technical team has asked for multiple estimates on a specific product component's delivery time. They fed the results of their measurements into a three-point analysis which identified the optimistic as 4 weeks, the most likely estimate of 7 weeks, and a pessimistic estimate of 14 weeks. The variance equals:
Two of your junior project managers are having an intense discussion about building a network diagram for their current project. It appears that while there is a clearly defined critical path, there are also three near critical paths and two other parallel paths with significantly more 'wiggle room' in the schedule. On these remaining two parallel paths, one of the activities has a required delay. The first project manager thinks this is a problem while the second project manager is arguing not to worry about it. Each thinks that the other doesn't really understand the issue. What is the real issue here?
The project team is progressing well with all planning activities. They have sat down with the customer for a JAD session to review some alternatives for proceeding with the project. The customer wants to model some of the potential paths forward to see which one of these paths offers the best solution. This type of analysis is best described as:
Management has requested that you look for ways to compress the schedule on your project. It seems that the end date will be 2 months too late for the business to obtain a marketing advantage for that year. You and the project team have looked at various schedule compression techniques, and have decided that fast tracking will be your best approach. What is an advantage and a disadvantage of fast tracking?
What is the critical path of the network described above?
The customer has asked that you reduce activity D by 2 weeks. What impact does this have on the schedule?
The customer has demanded that you reduce the schedule by three weeks. What does this mean in terms of the Project schedule?
You have just been assigned a new project within your organization. After performing an initial analysis, it has become obvious that you will not have enough resources to complete the project by the requested due date. You bring your analysis back to the sponsor and to senior management, who respond with, "just do the best you can". In looking at various scheduling techniques, which of the following would be the best scheduling approach to handle this situation?
A new design for an ocean-going oil tanker has prompted your organization to produce the first of a new generation of oil tanker. The project involves a complex project network diagram with a number of parallel paths. As the project progresses, the single critical path becomes 3 critical paths. As the project manager, what is your largest concern right now?
What is a key output from the Control Schedule process?
The project schedule has finally been completed for the project. In reviewing the resource estimates, you notice that several key resources have been assigned multiple activities on several parallel network paths. You have also noticed that the resources for the different time phases vary greatly, sometimes as much as 300%.What scheduling technique would be the best to use at this point?
What is the primary difference between critical path (CPM) and critical chain (CCPM) schedule approaches?
Cost variance is computed by:
You have just completed your project activity, work package, and contingency reserve estimates. What have you created as a result of completing these estimates?
Several vendors have proposed solutions for your current project. Your organization has made it a requirement that the lowest price solution will be the one that is selected to deliver the project. The vendor was selected and the project was completed successfully and handed off to the maintenance organization for ongoing product support. A year into the product's release, it has become apparent that the maintenance costs are much higher than what the organization had anticipated. What did the project manager probably forget to do?
What typifies an analogous estimate?
Which of the following is not needed to generate a schedule performance index (SPI)?
Earned value = 650, planned value = 550, actual cost = 700. What is the schedule variance at this point in time?
What is estimate at completion (EAC)?
You are in the planning phase of the project and are using various tools to estimate project costs. Which of the following is not a tool or output of the estimate costs process?
You have just initiated a new project in your organization. At the initial meeting with the stakeholders, several of them expressed concerns about the size of the budget. As the project manager, you coach the stakeholders by telling them that the project is being undertaken as a progressive elaboration. As a result, the initial budget estimate covers a wide range of+/-50% because not a lot is known about the project yet. This type of estimate is known as:
You have been keeping careful tabs on a 1 year project via weekly earned value calculations. A key factor is that an early product release will give your organization a decisive competitive advantage in the marketplace. However, at the last stakeholder meeting, one of the stakeholders questioned how well the project was really going. They are worried that the project is over budget and that if it continues in this way, the project will face a serious budget shortfall by the end of the project, jeopardizing its completion. At six months through the project, the SPI = 1.2, and the CPI = .95 and variances are expected to continue at this rate. What is the best response you can offer that would address this stakeholder's concerns?
Cost estimates are based on all the following except?
Project cost management is primarily concerned with ____________________________?
Management reserve is part of?
Value engineering is used when the project team wants to?
You've set aside a certain amount of your project funds to cover key, identified risks. What specifically did you use to determine how much should go into this fund?
The estimate of the work accomplished is defined as:
Two of your junior project managers in the PMO are having a disagreement about the meaning of earned value. The first project manager is arguing that earned value is the dollarized amount of the work actually completed; the second project manager is arguing that the earned value actually represents the amount of money that the work is supposed to cost within a given timeframe, and when that work is completed, you have earned that much value. While you are listening to the argument unfold, a stakeholder on their project approaches them and tells both project managers that the original basis of estimate was less accurate than a rough order of magnitude. How does this information mostly likely impact earned value calculations?
You are three months into a six month project. Assume the budget burn rate is constant. The budget at completion (BAC) is $120,000. AC = $65,000. The SPI = 1.2. What is the CPI of this project? (Round to 2 decimal places)
All of the following are incorrect regarding the computation of EAC except?
The project team has done outstanding work on a current project. While the stakeholders are satisfied with the product of the project, they have been consistently whining about the cost and have asked you, the project manager, to review options that would help reduce costs on the project. Given that this scope has been reduced to the most essential must-have items, where are your best options for reducing costs?
Several stakeholders on the project have been questioning the effectiveness of some of the technical team. While the work is proceeding according to plan, some of the stakeholders are not satisfied with the work delivered to date, even though it meets requirements specifications. You have held several meetings with the stakeholders to try to get to the root cause of the problem. With some of the technical team present at these meetings, it becomes obvious that some of the stakeholders have had great difficulty in describing what they want. As a result, some of the delivered product doesn't meet stakeholder expectations. Currently your CPI is 1.3 and the SPI is .89. What is your largest concern right now?
You are one year into a three year multimillion dollar project. The project CPI =.91 and the project SPI is 1.15. The Project is only earning $.91 for every dollar spent, while it is 15% ahead of schedule. As a result, the project manager has assembled the project team to review options for correcting the budget overage. Which of the following would best address the budget overage issue?
CPI is 1.2, SPI is 1.1. Four months later CPI is.91 and SPI is .86. The most likely reason for this change is:
Which performance index describes the cost projection of the remaining work that must be achieved to meet the goals of the project?
In terms of progress reporting, when do project activities earn value?
You are in the process of developing the quality management plan for your project. You have asked the technical team for some quality metrics that would be useful to document for the quality management plan. They've identified several other projects that are similar to this one, and seemed to think that the quality metrics established in these projects would also be applicable to the current project. This technique is called:
The project team has collected a series of issues and ranked them by frequency. This data will be a key input into your process improvement plan. What specific tool or technique is used to chart in this data?
The project stakeholders are somewhat concerned about the costs of delivering a quality product. While they want to make sure that the customer receives a high quality product they want to ascertain that the benefit of making certain quality improvements will actually translate into something the customer will buy. The process of comparing the quality expense to potential return on investment is called:
Part way through the project, one of the stakeholders approached you with a vexing problem. There was an issue with one of the components delivered in the project, however whenever the technical team tried to solve the problem, it kept coming back... As the project manager, you instructed the stakeholder that what was needed here was some form of root cause analysis. What is the best of the quality control tools to use in this situation?
A statistical process chart requires upper and lower control limits to help establish whether the process is performing as designed. What are the standard UCL/LCL limits in an SPC chart?
Who is responsible for project quality?
You are facilitating your project kickoff meeting and several of the stakeholders have gotten into a discussion regarding specific quality attributes that the product should possess. One of the stakeholders has referenced an article from the Gartner Group about best practices. Another stakeholder is focusing on specific quality processes maintained within their organization. As the project manager you are attempting to reconcile the differences that the stakeholders are raising. What is the real issue?
The project management life cycle consists of initiating, planning, executing, monitoring and controlling and closing. What cycle is the basis for quality improvement?
The usability of a product or a service by the customer was something that was described by Dr. Joseph Juran as:
All of the following elements are external impacts of poor quality except:
One of the purposes of a statistical process chart is to measure the variances in a process and to help determine whether those variances are random variations in the process or `attributable' causes. What does the standard deviation in the chart measure?
+/-3 sigma constitutes what percentage of the entire population measured in an SPC chart?
The cost of quality conformance is________________________?
Your organization was focused on producing good quality for the customer. After a recent merger, however, the new management team is questioning the processes you were using to produce this level of quality. The new CFO claimed that many of these processes were extraneous and were costing the company too much money. As a senior program manager, you set up a meeting with the CFO to discuss his concerns. What is the most effective argument you could make for maintaining good quality within the organization?
Quality policies and standards are established in :
You have just reviewed the most recent audit from the quality assurance organization which has identified an out-of-control process. You call the members of the technical team in for an emergency meeting to address the situation, as this is a critical process in your development effort. Analyzing an out of control situation for remediation occurs in which process and results in the creation of?
Your project stakeholders have come to you with an issue: they're attempting to tune a process in one of the recent deliverables from the technical team. They're trying to analyze whether a change in the sensitivity of the logging process will result in greater accuracy from the performance logs. The best chart to use that would illuminate a cause-and-effect relationship would be?
Zero defects is a concept promoted by:
You are working with the marketing organization to help develop a new advertising campaign using a direct mail model. There are literally hundreds of combinations of elements that can be used in each direct mail piece. Testing the most effective approach that will produce the highest response rate will take months to complete and potentially cost many hundreds of thousands of dollars. What method would help reduce the time, dollars, and the actual number of tests that would be required to ascertain the best direct mail combination of elements?
Your technical team has just identified a process that requires some corrective action. Corrective action is closest to:
You have been reviewing the output on a statistical process chart. While all the data in the chart is contained within the upper and lower control limits of the chart, a potential issue has been identified: it appears that there were eight consecutive points on the chart that occurred between the mean and +1 sigm
During quality planning, flowcharting can help the team_______________?
After several JAD sessions with the customer, the technical team has expressed some concerns. A number of the team members felt that they were not really getting a clear picture of the customer's actual requirements. They felt that actually visiting the customer's facility to see how the customer gets the job done would be great benefit in determining what you, the project manager, have frequently called 'the voice of the customer'. Capturing the voice of the customer is a key tool in which of the following processes?
The project sponsor and the technical team are sitting down to determine which features would best serve the customer in the upcoming project. The sponsor has indicated that they want to go beyond just simple customer satisfaction; they want to `wow' the customer. Which of the following processes would best demonstrate this distinction?
You're working in a lean manufacturing environment in which the watchword is `just in time' (JIT). This is the end of a 36 month process that took your organization from a top-heavy, costly and time-consuming process to a process that reduced cycle time by 85% and costs by 78%. A process that is JIT typically caries what % inventory?
The tool that lists the categories and subcategories of risk on a project is known as a:
An assumptions analysis is used to:
The project manager overhears two stakeholders discussing the current project. Each stakeholder is discussing the risk impacts of the project on each of their departments. The first stakeholder states that the project will have impact on her department, but states that the team has effective strategies for dealing with it. The second stakeholder is voicing great concern because it may cause them to double their workload. They are looking to acquire additional headcount to meet the need but the company just implemented a hiring freeze (!) At this point, the second stakeholder does not know how serious the impact on her department will be. At the next stakeholder meeting, what will you most likely discuss with the stakeholders?
SWOT means
You have called a meeting with your key stakeholders and team members to resolve a difficult project issue. You are attempting to generate a large number of ideas so that you can create the largest number of options and alternatives to address the problem. What tool are you most likely to use in this situation?
What is the purpose of a root cause analysis?
A series of stakeholder meetings were called to address the needs of stakeholders for the upcoming project. A list of 150 requirements was drawn up. After reviewing the list and developing a high level estimate, the PM reported back to the stakeholder group that due to the budget limitations on the project, it would be possible to deliver 75 of these requirements. A new meeting was called to cull the list from 150 to 75. The stakeholders, all PhD's, were going through the list, when there was serious (c) 2009-2013 Richard Perrin Evolutionten : Project Risk Management 11-27 contention about a group of requirements. The disagreement escalated to a shouting match, and several stakeholders left the meeting infuriated. What risk tool would have best prevented this situation?
All of the following are key risk register components with the exception of:
A unique aspect of the quantitative risk analysis process is that PMI recommends that quantitative risk analysis:
What is the expected monetary value (EMV)?
Your project is completed and is ready to roll into maintenance and support mode. You are weighing the risk of having the internal organization handle support; or contracting an external company that has guaranteed 99.9% response time within an hour for all support issues. There are financial penalties for the external company if it does not meet its guaranteed response time. You decide on the external vendor. This risk response strategy is known as?
You decide to develop a new product with a partner because the likelihood of product acceptance and success in the marketplace increases by a factor of three with this partner. This type of risk response strategy is best described as:
The risk register has been reviewed for completeness at this point in time. Risks have been prioritized based upon urgency and potential impact. As the team was working on the project, an event occurred that was not identified in the risk register. Since something needed to be done to handle the emergency, the technical team implemented a temporary fix until the issue could be discussed and a permanent resolution installed. This is best described as a:
Your risk register is reviewed by an external team every two weeks so that `fresh eyes' are looking at all potential risks. One of the risk response strategies to a specific risk is met with some skepticism by one of the assessors. "You may need to develop an additional response strategy in case this one creates additional problems for you." What kind of risk is she referring to?
You are developing a revolutionary new product for the telecom industry. It is a switching product that provides voice, video and data over the same pipeline, but uses a technology that has never been tried before. The potential return on investment for this product is $5 billion. Your estimated development costs are $150 million. If you go it alone, there is a 65% chance that you will succeed. You also decide to look into developing the product with a partner that has specific experience with this new technology. With a partner, there is an 85% chance that you will succeed, but development costs in this case are $250 million, of which the partner is carrying $50 million. Because you are shouldering 80% development costs, you decide to split the ROI with 80% going to you and 20% going to the partner if the project succeeds. What is the best EMV scenario from your organization's point of view?
Risk register updates typically include the following except:
The impact of risk and the probability of experiencing a risk event are best described in?
Which risk tool is the most effective for modeling what-if scenarios?
The process of determining which risks have the most potential impact on the project is known as a?
You are managing a project in which measurement accuracy is of paramount importance. Which of the following would have the largest impact to decrease the risk of obtaining inaccurate measurements?
You are managing a large project team of over 75 people. This computes to a minimum of 2775 potential lines of communication between all the team members. As the project manager, what is your largest risk concern?
Your project has implemented several risk response strategies along the way. While the risk response strategies have generally worked, the project manager wants to explicitly evaluate the success of those risk response strategies. The tool that would best help the project manager make this determination is:
You have just experienced a risk trigger on your project. What type of risk response usually occurs when a risk is triggered?
Who owns the resolution of any given risk on the project?
All the answers below are reasons for performing risk management except?
The contract does not specify how overcharges from the vendor should be handled on a Cost Reimbursable contract. The buyer receives an invoice from the vendor that has questionable charges. The buyer should:
You have engaged a sole source vendor to procure a critical product for your organization that is needed for your own product line. The vendor submits a contract which is reviewed by your legal team. While most of the provisions are agreeable, there are several questionable provisions that are clearly illegal and unenforceable in the state where the contract will be signed. The vendor has informed you that they will not provide the product or sign the contract without those questionable provisions included. The procurement of this product is critical to the survivability of your business, and time is of the essence. The vendor thinks they have your organization `over a barrel'. Aside from the questionable provisions in the contract, everything else in the contract is acceptable. As the buyer, your best option moving forward is to:
Which of the following are not advantages in a centralized contracting environment?
All of the following are required contract elements except:
Which of the following occurs in the Conduct Procurement process?
Your organization needs some specialized equipment for the next project. The project is anticipated to last one year. Salvage rate on the equipment is 25 cents on the dollar. When the project is done, you will have no use for the equipment. When performing a rent-or-buy analysis for this piece of equipment, the following facts are established: the equipment price is $28,000. The rental price is $3000/month for the first four months followed by $2000/month thereafter. What is your best option?
The contract specifies that payments are to be made when deliverables are received by the buyer. All of the following regarding the procurement statement of work (SOW) are true except:
Withholding a portion of a vendor's payment in order to guarantee delivery of the final product is called:
You are managing a contract in which you will not have much time to audit invoices. What is the best form of contract to choose under these conditions?
You are negotiating specific contract terms with a purchaser of your organization's flagship product. As the negotiations progress, a number of terms have already been hammered out, and the negotiation session looks to be proceeding well. Your final price comes to $1.25 million for the product and associated services. The customer's negotiator then says the following; "I am only allowed to spend up to $1 million on this product. If you're willing to offer it at that price, we can move forward, otherwise we will have to reconvene this session in two weeks". The negotiation tactic being employed at this point is described as:
When do contract negotiations occur on a project?
The buyer has established a CPFF vehicle for the current procurement activity. What is the buyer most concerned about?
What is the seller's biggest benefit for arranging a T&M contract with a potential buyer?
You have set up a cost reimbursable contract with your vendor on your organization's newest project. The most appropriate procurement document for a cost plus contract is:
Your company makes a product that a potential buyer is very interested in. After several discussions, the potential buyer issues a letter of intent to purchase the product within the next two months. Your company president takes this letter of intent (LOI) to the local commercial bank in the hopes of obtaining a short-term loan to purchase the necessary equipment to deliver on this potentially lucrative contract. The bank turns him down flat, even though the seller's finances are in good order. Why do you think this is the case?
What is a tool and technique of Close procurements?
You are negotiating contract terms with a potential buyer of your services. While one of the members of the negotiating team on the buyer's side has been very helpful in establishing reasonable terms, the buyer's negotiating partner has challenged every point put forth in the meeting by your team, stating you are `brain damaged'. At one point, this partner even verbally abuses the other negotiator on his team! This negotiation tactic is best known as:
The RFP is:
An output of Administer Procurements is:
The project manager can perform all the following functions in a procurement except:
The structured review of the procurement process from Plan Procurements through Administer Procurements is known as a:
Your company is the sole source provider of a specific product in the pharmaceutical industry. You currently enjoy a virtual monopoly in this product space. What would be your best strategy for maintaining your virtual monopoly in this area?
The PM has been authorized by the contract administrator in your organization to handle specific, low impact changes in the contract should the need arise. The vendor on this particular procurement has indicated a need for a major change in the current specification. You discuss the change with the vendor, verbally agree to it, and implement the change via the standard internal change control process. At an invoice audit several months later, the purchasing organization refuses to pay for the work that was entered in the change system. What has the project manager forgotten to do in this instance?
What costs are the most important costs that need to be considered when making a purchase decision for a product or service?
You are thinking of purchasing a software product from a relatively young organization they have been in business less than two years. This is a cutting edge financial product that would put you at least 18 months ahead of all competitors in your market space. However, your concern is that if you purchase software from them, there is a possibility that they may go out of business and you would lose the investment in the software. You ask the company to outright purchase the software code, but the company has rejected this as an option. What is your best option moving forward if the company`s survivability is an issue?
The scope baseline consists of which of the following elements?
The WBS is used for all of the following with the exception of:
Verify Scope defines a process that:
Two team members are having a discussion about where certain project documentation should exist. They're discussing several elements of the WBS between which there are dependencies. Where can this information be found?
Your project team has come to you with an issue. It appears that during the requirements elaboration process there was a disagreement between the members of the technical team regarding what had to be built to satisfy a user requirement. As a result, some of the technical team members created features in the deliverable that the customer did not really ask for. What would have specifically helped to avoid this situation?
Your stakeholders, a group of seven Ph.D.'s, have met to discuss the merits of moving forward with the project in a specific direction. The discussion started out fairly calmly until a point of contention was identified. At this point, the discussion began to escalate into an argument and finally ended in a shouting match between two of the Ph.D.'s. In addition, one of the members of the team had a differing opinion from his boss (one of the people engaged in the shouting match) and was reluctant to express his real views in the meeting. Which of the following would have been the best approach to avoid the previous scenario?
The team has been progressing ahead of schedule on their project deliverables. So far the customer is very pleased with the results and has commended the team for doing an outstanding job. At the last staff meeting one of the technical team members informed you that while he was working in the system, he noticed an issue that needed to be addressed. While it wasn't defined in the work breakdown structure, he ascertained that the fix would take at most an hour and wouldn't impact the deliverable. "In fact", he stated, "the customer will probably like what I did ". As the project manager, you talk to this technical team member off-line and inform him that what he has done is actually considered to be:
Your project team members need to know, in very specific terms, what work needs to be completed on the project. Which of the following is the least useful in describing what that work is?
What is scope decomposition?
Who ultimately controls changes to scope on a project?
A key input to collect requirements phase is?
A key stakeholder has been very difficult to manage on the project. He has been difficult to engage regarding his needed requirements for the project and frequently describes requirements in vague generalities. Then when something is delivered, he will complain that he was misunderstood or that the technical team `screwed up' his requirement. Last week he demanded a change in scope and insisted that it be completed by the end of the week. After the change was implemented he was shocked at the price tag and immediately escalated to senior management, claiming that the technical team was 'raking him over the coals'. The project manager had provided him with all the necessary documentation to understand the nature and scope of the change. What was the most likely element that the project manager may have omitted in this case?
Who creates the scope baseline? (c) 2009-2013 Richard Perrin Evolutionten : Project Scope Management 5-19
What is the best definition below of the difference between the Collect Requirements process and the Define Scope process?
The project management plan is an input to which of the following?
A project stakeholder identified a defect that they want fixed immediately. You raise the defect with the technical team at the next technical team meeting. After reviewing all the documentation in the configuration management system, you discover that the so-called 'defect' is really an enhancement request. What is the next thing you should do as the project manager?
Collecting the voice of the customer is a tool and technique contained in which process?
One level above the work package that helps identify cost centers or a charge code for the purposes of project accounting is known as a what?
The project team is tackling some work that they have never tried before this represents groundbreaking work on the project you're managing. As a result they're looking for different ways of organizing the work, and specifically organizing the particular jobs needed to complete the project. They want to make sure these jobs are organized in the most efficient method possible. One of the most effective tools to help the project team organize how they think about the work is:
The project you are managing is about 75% complete and at the monthly meeting with senior management, one of the key points is to review the variance analysis on the project. What is the purpose of the variance analysis?
You are working with a highly experienced technical team; each member has a minimum of 15 years experience. You are hosting a meeting for the team to discuss the best way to move forward with the project from a technical standpoint. There are number of different requirements that have been discussed, however one of the team members is behaving like a heckler making fun of ideas he thinks are not viable or telling people flat-out that they're wrong. This is beginning to disturb some of the other team members who have started to visibly disengage from the meeting. You ask this individual what the problem is and he responds, "Who died and put you in charge?" Once the meaning adjourns, you pay a visit to this team member's manager and are prepared to write-up this individual for insubordination. However what is probably the real problem?
When performing the scope control process, which of the following statements is correct?
You are in the requirements collection phase of the project. While a number of JAD sessions were held with the customer, there were still a lot of unanswered questions. The technical team lead decided that implementation of the QFD process would be best to collect the `voice of the customer'. The project team has decided it would be best to visit the customer's facility to understand how the customer performs their work. The process of going to where the work gets done to observe the customer is called:
The project management plan, validated deliverables, requirements documentation, and requirements traceability matrix are all considered:
Your team has just completed some work on a project and has submitted it to the users for verification. Once the users verify the results of this phase of the project, the team can start planning the next phase of the project, and it appears that you'll be ahead of schedule and slightly under budget to everyone's (c) 2009-2013 Richard Perrin Evolutionten : Project Scope Management 5-21 surprise! The customer reviews the work product and is satisfied that it will meet the needs of the project. This is called:
The hierarchy of needs is a motivational theory developed by:
Your project is well underway and you have called for the first kickoff meeting with your stakeholders and your project team members. At this meeting, some of the stakeholders expressed bewilderment and wonder why you have been chosen to head the project. One of the stakeholders exclaimed, "You're not even in this division, how is it that you were chosen to head this project?" Anticipating this concern, you prepared copies of the project charter, which you pass out to all the group participants. Since the charter names you as the project manager, the type of authority that this displays is known as:
The PM has been called by two of your project stakeholders to help resolve an issue. He sets up a brief meeting with the two stakeholders to listen to their concerns about a particular aspect of the current project. After hearing their concerns, his comment to both stakeholders is this: "I think you both made some good points here. Jerry, I think if we take part of your solution and combine it with some of Bill's ideas, I think we can bring this to a successful conclusion." What type of conflict resolution technique was being employed by the project manager?
At the last progress meeting, some of the team members thought that they were going above and beyond the call of duty in delivering certain aspects of the project. The project manager agreed and thought that since these key members were carrying some extra responsibility, the project could afford some special rewards such as having dinner brought in after 6 p.m. and comp time for the extra hours expended by these employees. This type of reward is called:
A resource histogram shows all of the following except:
A line manager in your organization is particularly difficult when dealing with project team members. He is suspicious of their work habits and feels that he must constantly micromanage their activities to ensure that the job gets done. This type of manager is known as:
What is a key responsibility of the sponsor for a project?
Theory Z is a leadership theory created by:
The Human resource plan is an output of the Develop Human Resource Plan process. Which of the following will most likely be created in support of this activity?
Senior management has received ongoing progress reports on the current project you are managing. It seems that one of the technical team has done an outstanding job of delivering certain aspects of the product in development, and management has taken notice. A Sr. VP has commented to you that they would like to move this resource onto the strategic planning team because of his outstanding job in the development are
At the last team meeting, several of the team members were tasked with delivering a short presentation to some of the stakeholders on certain product features under development. When the presentation has completed, one of the stakeholders asked a team member, who was responsible for delivering a specific set of features for one of the product components? The team member appeared a bit flustered and asked the PM for assistance with the question. What is most likely what the PM forgot to do?
The Roles & Responsibility matrix is best described and used for which of the following?
The project manager is in the process of developing the human resource plan for the project. What is the most likely tool and technique she would use to help create the human resource plan?
What motivational theory proposes that factors which act as dissatisfiers on a job will de-motivate the employee and become an obstacle to achievement?
When discussing a recognition and rewards system on your current project, senior management has been reluctant to agree to this aspect of human resource planning. In fact, one senior VP made some decisions regarding the triple constraints on the project that not only created scheduling problems for the team, but also imposed some unrealistic expectations on the team as well. As a result, certain deliverables were missed and VP wants the individuals who were responsible for these missed deliverables to be punished. As the project manager, what is the most appropriate response to the VP's request?
What are the five phases of the Tuckman model in order?
A new position in the company has been posted for a new senior manager with a very specific set of skills. One of your team members approaches you and asks about the position in confidence. You set up a meeting with this individual who asks you a series of questions about the position and concludes by saying, "I've seen a lot of positions like this posted but I don't think it will do me any good to apply for the job. It seems that when the company does something like this they already have the person in mind for the job but they simply have to post a job as a matter of corporate policy. I think my chances are slim to none of actually getting this job." What is being described here?
An issue log will contain all of the following except:
You've got some inexperienced team members in your organization inexperienced but very bright. In working with them for the last six months you have changed your management approach from one of telling them how to do their jobs to the point where you're coaching these team members when they come to you with questions. A few of them are very close to the point where you could simply delegate (c) 2009-2013 Richard Perrin Evolutionten : Project Human Resource Management 9-24 the work and step back, instructing them to call you if they run into difficulty. This describes something called:
Someone on the technical team who was working on a production emergency into the wee AM hours made an error that impacted the production system; he was so focused on the emergency that he forgot to run a repayment tape that caused another day of interest to be charged to the brokerage at a cost of $25000. The group VP was furious and called you with a demand: "Give me the name of the idiot that screwed this up!" As the project manager what would be your best response?
Of the major causes of conflict on a project, which of the following generally causes the greatest conflict?
Which is not a motivational theory?
At the last progress meeting, several stakeholders and team members got into an intense disagreement on how certain components in the current project should be constructed. One stakeholder wanted one of the components constructed using a specific technology (the stakeholder used to be a former IT resource). The technical team strongly disagreed the technical team lead stated that while the stakeholders could describe what they wanted, it was up to the technical the team to determine how they were going to best deliver it. The argument dragged on. After an hour, the stakeholders and the team members were no further along. Before you could speak, a senior VP who was also at the meeting stepped in and said the following, "This bantering is getting old. Either you figure out how to solve this problem or I will make a decision for you." The type of conflict resolution approach being used here is:
You have just been assigned a new project and met the project team for the first time. At this first meeting a number of the team members challenge you and question your ability to effectively lead the team. What is the best type of project manager authority you could possess that would help put the team on your side and earn their respect?
Many organizations claim to do teambuilding activities with their employees. Which of the following would be the most effective teambuilding activity for a new team that has just been formed?
ARMA is a?
The project manager is managing a nine member team. Two members are removed and reassigned from the team. How many lines of communication have been removed from the team?
You are managing a project in which there is a large procurement activity. One of the stakeholders approaches you with the need for a change. You have an off-line meeting with the stakeholder and discuss the change, decide it can be done and agree to implement. What mistake has the project manager made here?
You have just finished a recent progress meeting when an important technical issue emerged. With the help of two technical team members, you craft a detailed document, which is e-mailed to the rest of the team describing the issue and what can be done about it. What percentage of the message is actually going to be understood by the recipients?
All of the following are Forecasting methods with the exception of:
A variance analysis is used for:
The key element needed in an issue log is?
You have been asked for a report by senior management that indicates current budget, current schedule, and where the project may complete in terms of budget and timeline. The best type or report to use in this situation is called:
You just completed a meeting in which the stakeholders were tasked with various deliverables due at the next meeting. After the meeting, you sent down meeting notes to all the stakeholders reiterating the deliverables and the owners of those deliverables. At the next meeting, however, one of the stakeholders did not have their deliverable complete. They complained about having too much work and not receiving the follow-up e-mail message containing the meeting notes and the deliverable assigned to them. What would have been the best method for preventing such an occurrence?
When discussing a key technical issue with the team members on your project, which form of communication is most likely to help you best transmit your message?
When a message is being sent to a single receiver or a group of receivers, whose responsibility is it that the message is correctly understood?
All of the following are key elements in the active listening process except:
The stakeholder register is a key output of what process group?
The principle difference between Effective communication and Efficient communication means that:
You are managing a complex onshore team with resources from India, Ukraine, Nairobi, Ireland, Italy, France, Israel, and the United States. Several stakeholders have been invited to your most recent progress meeting. At the meeting, one of the stakeholders asked a question of one of the resources from Indi
Describing stakeholders based on their power (ability to impose will), urgency (need for immediate attention), and legitimacy (their involvement), describes what type of grid or model?
Which of the following best describes a stakeholder?
The stakeholder analysis matrix is part of ...?
You are managing three offshore teams: one in India, one in the Ukraine, and one in South Americ
The team members on your project have approached you with a need for some training. You discuss the issue with the stakeholders and decide that an e-learning system online would be the best way to handle the situation. What type of communication best describes this approach?
How much does noise add to a missed communication?
What is the key benefit in utilizing the Stakeholder Management Strategy?
The distribute information process yields:
Almost every child has played the telephone game at some time. A number of people sit in a circle and the initiator of the message whispers a message to the person on their right. That person, in turn, whispers the message to the next person in the circle, and so on, until it reaches the last person in the circle. No questions may be asked of the person sending the message. The message is sent by each person only once. In terms of the sender-receiver model, what does the telephone game demonstrate about the communication process?
The stakeholders on your project are very concerned about the outcome of the project. The organization is attempting a project in which there are significant unknowns, attempting technologies they have never used before. The stakeholders are looking to you, the project manager, for direction, problem solving, conflict resolution, and the ability to build a consensus for the new technologies in which there will be considerable resistance to change. What are the most effective tools or methods you can use to help build stakeholder trust?
The Create WBS process identifies the deliverables at the __________ level in the Work Breakdown Structure (WBS). http://www.gratisexam.com/
During the Plan Procurement Management phase, the make-or-____analysis must be completed. This technique prompts the project team to determine the source of their item.
) B The Delphi technique involves anonymous questionnaires circulated to a group of experts and provides an unbiased assessment of the risks. [ PMBOK 5th edition , Page 324] [Project Risk Management] Total Total
You are managing a multi-million dollar project, and discover several critical pieces of data in the project information repository have been modified without authorization. What should you do?
As an external vendor, you are managing a complex software project that has been contracted on Time & Material (T&M). One of your team-members reports a break-through in automating some of the testing activities. This will potentially result in cost savings to the project as well as the project getting completed ahead of schedule by a month. Which of the following actions would you take?
Michael is managing a construction project. The project charter has been approved by the project sponsor. What should Michael do next? http://www.gratisexam.com/
You are assigned to prepare the Procurement Management Plan for a project that involves setting up an orgwide supply chain management system. You are looking for a guideline on what type of contracts you can use and what type of contract forms are to be used for this project. Which source will help you obtain this?
While rating a proposal, one of the requirements was "The proposed project manager needs to be a certified Project Management Professional, PMP(R) " This is an example of: http://www.gratisexam.com/
Which process group corresponds to the "act" component of the plan-do-check-act cycle?
You have completed your estimates for your project and determined that it will take 10 months to complete. However, your project sponsor insists that it be completed in 9 months. How do you handle this?
The list of identified risks is found in the risk register. However, the high-level risks are first listed in the:
A requesting organization for a project created a document that included the business need and the costbenefit analysis. What would this document be termed as?
You've just completed a solid waste management project in an under-developed country. The contractor you are working for has a strict policy of abiding by local laws and rules, although the local resources working on the project have a much more lax approach to following laws and policies. Now at the end of the project, you are handing over the operational equipment to the local operators and disposing of the leftover inventory and other furniture which was used during the project. More than 50% of the toxic materials used during the project remains in your inventory. There is no law that would prohibit you from disposing of either the type or quantity of remaining materials in the local sewage system. What should you do?
A research project needed to be carried out under largely undefined, uncertain and rapidly changing environmental conditions. If this project is carried out as a multi-phase project, which of the following phase-tophase relationships best suits it?
Your are working for a large project organization, with several project managers, working on 15 projects. All project managers submit their status reports at month end. One of your colleague project manager has reported an error in last 2 months. Discussing the issue with one of her project's team members, who is also working on one of your projects, you realize that she is deliberately misreporting the project's status, to pumpup her performance as the annual performance appraisal is due next month. The month-end review meeting will be held in 2 days time as you are preparing your presentation for the same. What should you say about her status report?
Experienced project managers always tell that accuracy and precision are not the same. Precise measurements may not be accurate and accurate measurements may not be precise. Which of the following statementsabout the precision and accuracy are CORRECT?
There is a heavy demand for new houses in your city's expensive neighborhood. RECON, a construction company employed you as a project manager to assess the benefit of building new energy efficient houses in that neighborhood although it takes more expensive technology to build such houses. You have started gathering data to perform the detail payback analysis to submit a report to the management. Since the full financial impact of energy efficient house building is difficult to estimate, you would like to prepare a rough costbenefit analysis and include it with the report. Which of the following describes the effort you are undertaking in this scenario?
Decision making is an important skill a project manager must possess to manage and lead the team. Which of the following is NOT a part of the six-phase decision-making model?
Bill is managing a healthcare software development project using state-of-the-art technology. Stakeholder management is very crucial for the success of this project. The stakeholder involvement and influence is significant on this project. During which of following project stages, stakeholder management will be the most challenging task for Bill?
The project sponsor has approached you with a dilemma. At the annual stockholders meeting, the CEO announced that the project you're managing will be completed by the end of this year. The problem is that this is six months prior to the scheduled completion date. It's too late to go back and correct her mistake, and now stockholders expect implementation by the announced date. You must speed up the delivery date of this project. Your primary constraint before this occurred was the budget. Choose the best action from the options listed to speed up the project.
Which of the following is not another term for inspections?
You've been assigned as a project manager on a research and development project for a new dental procedure. You're working in the Project Scope Management Knowledge Area. What is the purpose of the scope management plan?
Which of the following statements regarding Ishikawa diagrams in the Identify Risks process is not true?
You are the project manager for Xylophone Phonics. It produces children's software programs that teach basic reading and math skills. You're performing cost estimates for your project and don't have a lot of details yet. Which of the following techniques should you use?
This process is concerned with determining the engagement levels of the stakeholders.
All of the following statements are true regarding risk events except which one?
The Conduct Procurement process applies evaluation criteria to bids and proposals and selects a vendor. It also uses independent estimates to compare vendor prices. This is also known as which of the following?
You are the project manager for Xylophone Phonics. This company produces children's software programs that teach basic reading and math skills. You are ready to assign project roles, responsibilities, and reporting relationships. On which project Planning process are you working?
You know that PV = 470, AC = 430, EV = 460, EAC = 500, and BAC = 525. What is VAC?
You are a project manager who has recently held a project team kickoff meeting where all the team members were formally introduced to each other. Some of the team members know each other from other projects and have been working with you for the past three weeks. Which of the following statements is not true?
Which of the following schedule compression techniques increases risk?
Name the ethical code you'll be required to adhere to as a PMP(R) credential holder.
Which of the following are tools and techniques of the Identify Stakeholders process?
You are a project manager working on a software development project. You've developed the risk management plan, identified risks, and determined risk responses for the risks. A risk event occurs, and you implement the response. Then, another risk event occurs as a result of the response you implemented. What type of risk is this?
You are working on a project that will upgrade the phone system in your customer service center. You have considered using analogous estimating, parametric estimating, bottom-up estimating, and three-point estimating to determine activity costs. Which process does this describe?
Feeding buffers and the project buffer are part of which of the following Develop Schedule tools and techniques?
You are working on a project that will upgrade the phone system in your customer service center. You have used bottom-up estimating techniques to assign costs to the project activities and have determined the cost baseline. Which of the following statements is true?
Each of the following options describes an element of the Develop Project Management Plan process except for which one?
Which of the following statements regarding configuration management is not true?
The inputs of the Control Communications process include all of the following except for which one?
You are the project manager for Xylophone Phonics. It produces children's software programs that teach basic reading and math skills. You are performing the Plan Quality Management process and are identifying nonproductive activities. Part of this involves capturing information such as process boundaries, process configurations, and process metrics. Which of the following does this describe?
You are a project manager working in a foreign country. You observe that some of your project team members are having a difficult time adjusting to the new culture. You provided them with training on cultural differences and the customs of this country before they arrived, but they still seem uncomfortable and disoriented. Which of the following statements is true?
You are the project manager for a construction company that is building a new city and county office building in your city. You recently looked over the construction site to determine whether the work to date conformed to the requirements and quality standards. Which tool and technique of the Control Quality process were you using?
Every status meeting should have time allotted for reviewing risks. Which of the following sentences is not true?
As a result of a face-to-face meeting you recently had to discuss the items in your issue log; you have resolved issues and come away with an approved corrective action and an update to the project management plan. Which process does this describe?
As a PMP(R) credential holder, one of your responsibilities is to ensure integrity on the project. When your personal interests are put above the interests of the project or when you use your influence to cause others to make decisions in your favor without regard for the project outcome, this is considered which of the following?
Which of the following statements regarding the ADM method is not true?
According to the PMBOK(R) Guide, which of the following names all the components of a communication model?
A project is considered successful when __________________.
The amount of authority a project manager possesses can be related to all of following except which one?
You have been assigned to a project in which the objectives are to direct customer calls to an interactive voice response system before they are connected to a live agent. You are in charge of the media communications for this project. You report to the project manager in charge of this project and the VP of marketing, who share responsibility for this project. Which organizational structure do you work in?
During which project management process group are risk and stakeholder's ability to influence project outcomes the highest?
All of the following are true regarding a PMO except for which one?
You've been hired as a manager for the adjustments department of a nationwide bank based in your city. The adjustments department is responsible for making corrections to customer accounts. This is a large department, with several smaller sections that deal with specific accounts, such as personal checking or commercial checking. You've received your first set of management reports and can't make heads or tails of the information. Each section appears to use a different methodology to audit their work and record the data for the management report. You request that a project manager from the PMO come down and get started right away on a project to streamline this process and make the data and reports consistent. This project came about as a result of which of the following?
You work for a large manufacturing plant. Your firm is thinking of initiating a new project to release an overseas product line. This is the company's first experience in the overseas market, and it wants to make a big splash with the introduction of this product. The project entails producing your product in a concentrated formula and packaging it in smaller containers than the US product uses. A new machine is needed in order to mix the first set of ingredients in the concentrated formula. Which of the following actions is the next best step the project manager should take?
You are the project manager for Fun Days Vacation Resorts. Your new project assignment is to head up the Fun Days resort opening in Austin, Texas. You are estimating the duration of the project management plan activities, devising the project schedule, and monitoring and controlling deviations from the schedule. Which of the Project Management Knowledge Areas are you working in?
Which of the following lists of processes belongs to the Project Integration Management Knowledge Area?
You are the project manager for the Late Night Smooth Jazz Club chain, with clubs in 12 states. Smooth Jazz is considering opening a new club in Arizona or Nevada. You have derived the following information: Project Arizona: The payback period is 18 months, and the NPV is (250). Project Nevada: The payback period is 24 months, and the NPV is 300. Which project would you recommend to the selection committee?
Which of the following best describes the purpose of a business case?
You are in the process of identifying your stakeholders. You are using one of the tools and techniques of this process that according to the PMBOK(R) Guide involves all of the following steps except for which one?
You are a project manager for Zippy Tees. Your selection committee has just chosen a project you recommended for implementation. Your project is to manufacture a line of miniature stuffed bears that will be attached to your company's trendy T-shirts. The bears will be wearing the same T-shirt design as the shirt to which they're attached. Your project sponsor thinks you've impressed the big boss and wants you to skip to the manufacturing process right away. What is your response?
You are a project manager for an agricultural supply company. You have interviewed stakeholders and gathered requirements. Which of the following is true regarding the process to which this question refers?
Which of the following makes up the scope baseline?
Your company, Kick That Ball Sports, has appointed you as project manager for its new Cricket product line introduction. This is a national effort, and all the retail stores across the country need to have the new products on the shelves before the media advertising blitz begins. The product line involves three new products, two of which will be introduced together and a third one that will follow within two years. You are ready to create the WBS. All of the following are true except for which one?
You are a project manager for Giraffe Enterprises. You've recently taken over for a project manager who lied about his PMI(R) certification and was subsequently fired. Unfortunately, he did a poor job of defining the scope. Which of the following could happen if you don't correct this?
You are a project manager working on a large, complex project. You've constructed the WBS for this project, and all of the work package levels are subprojects of this project. You've requested that the subproject managers report to you in three weeks with their individual WBSs constructed. Which statement is not true regarding your WBS?
You are a project manager working on a new software product your company plans to market to businesses. The project sponsor told you that the project must be completed by September 1. The company plans to demo the new software product at a trade show in late September and, therefore, needs the project completed in time for the trade show. However, the sponsor has also told you that the budget is fixed at $85,000, and it would take an act of Congress to get it increased. You must complete the project within the given time frame and budget. Which of the following is the primary constraint for this project?
You are in the process of translating project objectives into tangible deliverables and requirements. All of the following are techniques used in the product analysis tool and technique of the Define Scope process except which one?
You are a project manager for a documentary film company. In light of a recent regional tragedy, the company president wants to produce a new documentary on the efforts of the heroic rescue teams to air as soon as possible. She's looking to you to make this documentary the best that has ever been produced in the history of this company. She guarantees you free rein to use whatever resources you need to get this project done quickly. However, the best photographer in the company is currently working on another assignment. Which of the following is true?
Your project depends on a key deliverable from a vendor you've used several times before with great success. You're counting on the delivery to arrive on June 1. This is an example of a/an ___________________.
You have been hired as a contract project manager for Grapevine Vineyards. Grapevine wants you to design an Internet wine club for its customers. One of the activities for this project is the installation and testing of several new servers. You know from past experience it takes about 16 hours per server to accomplish this task. Since you're installing 10 new servers, you estimate this activity to take 160 hours. Which of the estimating techniques have you used?
You are working on a project that requires resources with expertise in the areas of hospitality management and entertainment. You are preparing your project schedule network diagram and know that you will use only finish-tostart dependencies. Which of the following diagramming methods does this describe?
You are a project manager for Picture Shades, Inc. Your company manufactures window shades that have replicas of Renaissance-era paintings for hotel chains. Picture Shades is taking its product to the home market, and you're managing the new project. It will offer its products at retail stores as well as on its website. You're developing the project schedule for this undertaking and have determined the critical path. Which of the following statements is true?
You are a project manager for Picture Shades, Inc. Your company manufactures window shades that have replicas of Renaissance-era paintings for hotel chains. Picture Shades is taking its product to the home market, and you're managing the new project. It will offer its products at retail stores as well as on its website. You're developing the project schedule for this undertaking. Looking at the following graph, which path is the critical path?
Use the following graphic to answer this question. If the duration of activity B was changed to 10 days and the duration of activity G was changed to 9 days, which path is the critical path?
You are the project manager working on a research project for a new drug treatment. Your preliminary project schedule runs past the due date for a federal grant application. The manager of the R&D department has agreed to release two resources to work on your project to meet the federal grant application date. This is an example of _______________________.
You are the project manager for Rivera Gourmet Adventure Vacations. Rivera combines the wonderful tastes of great gourmet food with outdoor adventure activities. Your project involves installing a new human resources software system. Your stakeholders understand this is a large undertaking and that you might experience some schedule slippage. Jason, the database analyst working on this project, is overallocated. He is critical to the success of the project and you don't want to burn him out by overscheduling him. Which of the following actions should you take?
All of the following are true regarding the stakeholder management plan except for which one?
You are a project manager working for iTrim Central. Your organization has developed a new dieting technique that is sure to be the next craze. One of the deliverables of your feasibility study was an analysis of the potential financial performance of this new product, and your executives are very pleased with the numbers. You will be working with several vendors to produce products, marketing campaigns, and software that will track customers' progress with the new techniques. For purposes of performing earned value measurements for project costs, you are going to place which of the following in the WBS?
You have received the following estimates for a complex activity that is critical to the success of your project. The three-point estimates are as follows: the most likely estimate is $42, the optimistic estimate is $35, and the pessimistic estimate is $54. What is the expected activity cost of this activity using the beta distribution formula (rounded to the nearest dollar)?
You are the project manager for a custom home-building construction company. You are working on the model home project for the upcoming Show Homes Tour. The model home includes Internet connections in every room, talking appliances, and wiring for home theaters. You are working on the cost baseline for this project. All of the following statements are true except which one?
You are the project manager for a custom-home-building construction company. You are working on the model home project for the upcoming Show Homes Tour. The model home includes Internet connections in every room, talking appliances, and wiring for home theaters. You are working on the Determine Budget process. All of the following statements are true except which one?
Your project sponsor has requested a cost estimate for the project on which you're working. This project is similar in scope to a project you worked on last year. She would like to get the cost estimates as soon as possible. Accuracy is not her primary concern right now. She needs a ballpark figure by tomorrow. You decide to use __________________.
You have eight key stakeholders (plus yourself) to communicate with on your project. Which of the following is true?
All of the following are true regarding Plan Communications Management except for which one?
You are preparing your communications management plan and know that all of the following are true except for which one?
Which of the following ensures that information is distributed but does not acknowledge or certify that it was understood by the intended receiver(s)?
You are a project manager for Fountain of Youth Spring Water bottlers. Your project involves installing a new accounting system, and you're performing the risk-planning processes. You have identified several problems along with the causes of those problems. Which of the following diagrams will you use to show each problem and its causes and effects?
Assessing the probability and consequences of identified risks to the project objectives, assigning a risk score to each risk, and creating a list of prioritized risks describe which of the following processes?
The information-gathering techniques used in the Identify Risks process include all of the following except _______________________.
You are the project manager for a new website for the local zoo. You need to perform the Perform Qualitative Risk Analysis process. When you've completed this process, you'll produce all of the following as part of the project documents updates output except which one?
You've identified a risk event on your current project that could save $100,000 in project costs if it occurs. Which of the following is true based on this statement?
You've identified a risk event on your current project that could save $500,000 in project costs if it occurs. Your organization is considering hiring a consulting firm to help establish proper project management techniques in order to assure it realizes these savings. Which of the following is true based on this statement?
Your hardware vendor left you a voicemail saying that a snowstorm in the Midwest might prevent your equipment from arriving on time. She wanted to give you a heads-up and asked that you return the call. Which of the following statements is true?
Risk attitude is an enterprise environmental factor that you should evaluate when performing the Plan Risk Management process. Risk attitude consists of all of the following elements except for which one?
You work for a large manufacturing plant. You are working on a new project to release an overseas product line. This is the company's first experience in the overseas market, and it wants to make a big splash with the introduction of this product. The stakeholders are a bit nervous about the project and historically proceed cautiously and take a considerable amount of time to examine information before making a final decision. The project entails producing your product in a concentrated formula and packaging it in smaller containers than the US product uses. A new machine is needed to mix the ingredients into a concentrated formula. After speaking with one of your stakeholders, you discover this will be the first machine your organization has purchased from your new supplier. Which of the following statements is true given the information in this question?
You are the project manager for the Heart of Texas casual clothing company. Your company is introducing a new line of clothing called Black Sheep Ranch Wear. You will outsource the production of this clothing line to a vendor. The vendor has requested a procurement SOW. All of the following statements are true except for which one?
You are the project manager for the Heart of Texas casual clothing company. Your company is introducing a new line of clothing called Black Sheep Ranch Wear. You will outsource the production of this clothing line to a vendor. Your legal department has recommended you use a contract that reimburses the seller's allowable costs and builds in a bonus based on the vendor achieving the performance criteria they've outlined in their memo. Which of the following contract types will you use?
All of the following statements are true regarding the Plan Human Resource Management process except for which one?
Which of the following are constraints that you might find during the Plan Human Resource Management process?
You have been hired as a contract project manager for Grapevine Vineyards. Grapevine wants you to design an Internet wine club for its customers. Customers must register before being allowed to order wine over the Internet so that legal age can be established. You know this project will require new hardware and an update to some existing infrastructure. You will have to hire an expert to help with the infrastructure assessment and upgrades. You also know that the module to verify registration must be written and tested using data from Grapevine's existing database. This new module cannot be tested until the data from the existing system is loaded. You are going to hire a vendor to perform the programming and testing tasks for this module to help speed up the project schedule. The vendor will be reimbursed for all their costs, and you want to use a contract type that will allow you to give the vendor a little something extra if you are satisfied with the work they do. You know all of the following apply in this situation except for which one?
You are the project manager for BB Tops, a nationwide toy store chain. Your new project involves creating a prototype display at several stores across the country. You are using an RACI chart to display individuals and activities. What does RACI stand for?
Which process has the greatest ability to directly influence the project schedule?
All of the following are true regarding the Plan Quality Management process except for which one?
The theory that 85 percent of the cost of quality is a management problem is attributed to ___________________.
The quality management plan documents how the project team will implement the quality policy. It should address at least all of the following except which one?
You work for a furniture manufacturer. Your project is going to design and produce a new office chair. The chair will have the ability to function as a regular chair and also the ability to move its occupant into an upright, kneeling position. The design team is trying to determine the combination of comfort and ease of transformation to the new position that will give the chair the best characteristics while keeping the costs reasonable. Several different combinations have been tested. This is an example of which of the following tools and techniques of Plan Quality Management?
Your organization is embarking on a long-term project that will require additional human resources on a contract basis to complete the work of the project. Since the project will span several years, you know one vendor probably can't supply all the resources you'll need over the course of the contract. However, you want to work with only one vendor throughout the project to minimize the amount of procurement documents you'll have to produce. So, you'll specify in your procurement documents that contractors will have to form partnerships to work on this project. You know all of the following are true regarding this question except for which one?
You are a project manager for a growing dairy farm business. It offers organic dairy products regionally and is expanding its operations to the West Coast. It is in the process of purchasing and leasing dairy farm businesses to get operations underway. You are in charge of the network operations part of this project. An important deadline that depends on the successful completion of the testing phase is approaching. You've detected some problems with your hardware in the testing phase and discover that the hardware is not compatible with other network equipment. You take corrective action and exchange the hardware for more compatible equipment. Which of the following statements is true?
You are a project manager for a growing dairy farm business. It offers organic dairy products regionally and is expanding its operations to the West Coast. It's in the process of purchasing and leasing dairy farm businesses to get operations under way. The subproject manager in charge of network operations has reported some hardware problems to you. You're also having problems coordinating and integrating other elements of the project. Which of the following statements is true?
Which of the following process groups serve as inputs to each other?
Your team members have just completed training on specialized equipment. This is one of the work results you've gathered and recorded. Which of the following outputs of the Direct and Manage Project Work process does this describe?
You are reporting on project elements such as schedule status, deliverables completion, lessons learned, and resource utilization. Which of the following outputs of the Direct and Manage Project Work does this describe?
During a recent team meeting, you reached a resolution to a problem that's been troubling the team for several weeks. It turned out that there was a problem with one of the manufactured parts required for the project. Once this was corrected, the remaining production run went off without a hitch. You took responsibility for searching out the facts of this problem and implemented a change request to resolve the issue. Which of the following is true regarding this question?
You are the project manager for a cable service provider. Your project team is researching a new service offering. They have been working together for quite some time and have a good understanding of the task at hand. They will not likely need any direction from you to complete this task. According to Blanchard, what type of leadership style does this describe?
When working in a matrix environment, all of the following are true regarding the Manage Project Team process except for which one?
You are preparing project performance appraisals and have decided you'd like each team member to receive feedback regarding their performance from several sources, including peers, superiors, and subordinates. Which of the following is true?
Receivers in the communication model filter their information through all of the following, except which one?
You know that the next status meeting will require some discussion and a decision for a problem that has surfaced on the project. To make the most accurate decision, you know that the number of participants in the meeting should be limited to how many?
You are holding end-of-phase meetings with your team members and key stakeholders to learn what has hindered and helped the project team's performance of the work. All of the following are true regarding this situation except for which one?
You are a project manager for Dakota Software Consulting Services. You're working with a major retailer that offers its products through mail-order catalogs. The company is interested in knowing customer characteristics, the amounts of first-time orders, and similar information. As a potential bidder for this project, you worked on the RFP response and submitted the proposal. When the selection committee received the RFP responses from all the vendors bidding on this project, they used a weighted system to make a selection. This is a part of which tool and technique?
You have been asked to submit a proposal for a project that has been put out for bid. First you attend the bidder conference to ask questions of the buyers and to hear the questions some of the other bidders will ask. Which of the following statements is not true?
Which of the following tools and techniques of the Conduct Procurements process is used to check and compare proposed pricing to the benchmark?
You are a contract project manager for a wholesale flower distribution company. Your project involves developing a website for the company to allow retailers to place their flower orders online. You will also provide a separate link for individual purchases that are ordered, packaged, and mailed to the consumer directly from the grower's site. This project involves coordinating the parent company, growers, and distributors. You've discovered a problem with one of the technical processes needed to perform this project. You decide to perform root cause analysis to determine the cause of this problem and recommended preventive actions. Which of the following is true?
You are using the Quality Management and Control Tools tool and technique of the Perform Quality Assurance process that will help you establish expected values for the dependent relationships in the hierarchy. Which tool within this tool and technique are you using?
You are working on a project and discover that one of the business users responsible for testing the product never completed this activity. She has written an email requesting that one of your team members drop everything to assist her with a problem that could have been avoided if she had performed the test. This employee reports to a stakeholder, not to the project team. All project team members and stakeholders are co-located. Because your team also needs her to participate in an upcoming test, you decide to do which of the following?
Negotiated draft contracts that will be used to create the final contract are a requirement of which of the following outputs of the Conduct Procurements process?
Which of the following statements is false regarding contract life cycles?
You are working on a project and discover that one of the business users responsible for testing the product never completed this activity. She has written an email requesting that one of your team members drop everything to assist her with a problem that could have been avoided if she had performed the test. This employee reports to a stakeholder, not to the project team. You estimate that the project might not be completed on time as a result of this missed activity. All of the following are true except for which one?
Which option includes all of the tools and techniques of the Control Procurements process?
You are a project manager for an engineering company. Your company won the bid to add ramp-metering lights to several on-ramps along a stretch of highway at the south end of the city. You subcontracted a portion of the project to another company. The subcontractor's work involves digging the holes and setting the lamp poles in concrete. The subcontractor's performance to date does not meet the contract requirements. Which of the following is not a valid option?
The Control Procurements process is closely integrated with all of the following processes except for which one?
You are performing actions such as collecting and reporting information regarding the progress of the project and ensuring that the right information is delivered to the right people at the right time. Which process are you performing?
All of the following are tools and techniques of the Control Communications process except which one?
Your project is progressing as planned. You are conducting a status meeting and are reviewing items that need resolution. You have asked the owners of these items to report their progress and are tracking the due dates for their resolution. Which input of the Control Communications process does this describe?
You are in the Conduct Procurements process. You and your vendor are in the midst of contested changes and cannot reach a resolution. Which of the following methods should be your first course of action to resolve this issue?
You are a project manager for Bluebird Technologies. Bluebird writes custom billing applications for several industries. A schedule change has been requested. From the perspective of the Perform Integrated Change Control, change is concerned with all of the following except which one?
You are a project manager for Star Light Strings. Star Light manufactures strings of lights for outdoor displays. Its products range from simple light strings to elaborate lights with animal designs, bug designs, memorabilia, and so on. Your newest project requires a change. You have documented the characteristics of the product and its functionality using which of the following tools and techniques?
According the PMBOK(R) Guide, which system centrally manages approved changes to the specifications of the deliverables or the project management processes?
Your project has experienced some changes to the agreed-on WBS elements. The changes were approved through the proper change control process. The WBS changes might in turn require which of the following?
You are a project manager for Dakota Software Consulting Services. You're working with a major retailer that offers its products through mail-order catalogs. It is interested in knowing customer characteristics, the amounts of first-time orders, and similar information. The stakeholders have accepted the project scope. Work has begun on the project, and you're confirming some of the initial work results with the stakeholders. You've asked for acceptance of the work results. Which process are you performing?
You are the project manager for a top-secret software project for an agency of the United States government. Getting top-secret clearances for contractors takes quite a bit of time, and waiting for clearances would jeopardize the implementation date. Your mission--should you choose to accept it--is to complete the project using internal resources. Your programmers are 80 percent of the way through the programming and testing work when your agency appoints a new executive director. Your programmers are siphoned off this project to work on the executive director's hot new project. Which of the following addresses the purpose of Validate Scope in this case?
Which of the following might require re-baselining of the cost baseline?
You have accepted project performance to date and assume future work (ETC) will be performed at the budgeted rate. If BAC = 800, ETC = 275, PV = 300, AC = 200, EV = 250, and CPI = 1.25, what is the EAC?
You know that EAC = 375, PV = 300, AC = 200, and EV = 250. You expect the work of the project to continue as planned. What is the ETC?
You expect future project performance to be consistent with the project performance experienced to date for this work component. If BAC = 800, ETC = 275, PV = 300, AC = 200, EV = 250, and CPI = 1.25, what is the EAC?
You know that BAC = 500, PV = 325, AC = 275, CPI = 0.9, and EV = 250, and you are using actual costs to date and assuming ETC uses the budgeted rate. Variance at completion tells you which of the following?
You know that BAC = 2500, PV = 1250, AC = 1275, EV = 1150, and that you are experiencing typical cost variances. What is ETC?
Your project progressed as planned until yesterday. Suddenly, an unexpected risk event occurred. You quickly devised a response to deal with this negative risk event using which of the following outputs of Control Risks?
You are the project manager for a top-secret software project for an agency of the United States government. Your mission--should you choose to accept it--is to complete the project using internal resources. Finding contractors with top-secret clearances takes quite a bit of time, and waiting for clearances would jeopardize the implementation date. Your programmers are 80 percent of the way through the programming and testing work when your agency appoints a new executive director. Slowly but surely your programmers are taken off this project and reassigned to the executive director's hot new project. Which of the following types of project ending is this?
You are a project manager for Dutch Harbor Consulting. Your latest project involves the upgrade of an organization's operating system on 236 servers. You performed this project under contract. You are in the Close Procurements process and know that you should document and file which of the following?
You are a project manager for Dutch Harbor Consulting. Your latest project involves the upgrade of an organization's operating system on 236 servers. You performed this project under contract. You are in the Close Procurements process and have reviewed the contracting process to identify lessons learned. What is the name of the tool and technique you will use to perform this function?
You are a project manager working on contract. You've performed earned value analysis and discovered that the project will be completed on time and under the original estimated amount. This means the profit to your company will decrease, as will your personal bonus. Which of the following should you do?
Life seems to be going very well for your close friend, a project manager, who like you has PMP(R) certification. She has taken a trip to France, purchased a new car, and stocked her wine cellar with a couple dozen expensive bottles of wine, all within the last six months. After a few cocktails one evening, she tells you her secret. The vendor she's working with on the $4 billion project she's managing has given her all of these items as gifts. Which scenario is the most appropriate?
You are a contract project manager working with the State of Bliss. Your latest project involves rewriting the Department of Revenue's income tax system. One of the key stakeholders is a huge movie buff, and she has the power to promote you into a better position at the conclusion of this project. She has discovered that one of her favorite superstars lives in the State of Bliss and, therefore, must file income tax returns in that state. She asks you to look up the account of this movie star. What is the most appropriate response?
You are a project manager with several years of experience in project management. You've accepted your first project in a foreign country. You've been in the country a week or two and are experiencing some disorientation. This is known as which of the following?
You are a project manager for a software manufacturing firm. The project you just finished created a new software product that is expected to become a number-one seller. All prerelease of software is handled through the marketing department. A friend of yours, who is a certified software instructor, asks you for a copy of the software prior to the beta release so they can become familiar with it. What is the most appropriate response?
The primary function of the Closing processes is to perform all of the following except which one?
Which of the following lists the outputs of the Perform Integrated Change Control process?
Which of the following describes the key focus or purpose of the Manage Project Knowledge process?
There are likely to be team loyalty issues in a matrixed environment. All of the following are true regarding this situation as it pertains to the Manage Team process except for which one?
Monte Carlo analysis can help predict the impact of risks on project deliverables. It is an element of one of the tools and techniques of one of the following processes. The other tools and techniques of this process include sensitivity analysis, decision tree analysis, and influence diagrams.
All of the following are tools and techniques of the Close Project or Phase process except for which one?
The inputs of the Monitor Communications process include all of the following except for which one?
You are the project manager for Xylophone Phonics. It produces children's software programs that teach basic reading and math skills. You are performing the Plan Quality Management process and are identifying operational definitions. Which of the following does this describe?
You are the project manager for Heartthrobs by the Numbers Dating Services. You're working on an updated Internet site that will display pictures as well as short bios of prospective heartbreakers. You've just completed your project team assignments including the project team directory, and you published the resource calendar. Which process are you in?
You are performing alternatives analysis as part of the Define Scope process. Which of the following options is not true?
All of the following statements are true of the project Closing process group except for which one?
The business need or demand that brought about the project, high-level scope description, analysis of the problem or opportunity the project presents, recommendation, and an evaluation statement together describe elements of which of the following?
As a result of a face-to-face meeting you recently had to discuss the items in your issue log, you have resolved issues, managed expectations, and come away with an action plan that will improve project performance and will also require an update to the communications management plan (part of the project management plan). Which process does this describe?
According to the PMBOK(R) Guide, which of the following names all the components of an interactive communication model?
Who is responsible for performing and managing project integration when using an Agile project management approach?
These types of meetings are associated with the Agile project management methodologies. They occur at the beginning of an iteration. Team members choose items from the backlog list to work on during the iteration. What is this meeting called?
The Plan Procurement process applies evaluation criteria to bids and proposals and selects a vendor. It also uses independent estimates to compare vendor prices. This is also known as which of the following?
A project is considered successful when .
All of the following are true regarding multiphased relationships except for which one?
You are a project manager for a large software development project. You are using an Agile approach to manage this project. The product owner has prioritized the backlog. How will team members be assigned this work?
The amount of authority a project manager possesses can be related to all of the following except which one?
You have been assigned to a project in which the objectives are to expand three miles of the north-to-south highway through your city by two lanes in each direction. You are in charge of the demolition phase of this project, and you report to the project manager in charge of this project. This project is producing deliverables in short periods of time. You work with the product owner. Your project team holds daily standup meetings and they hold retrospective meetings at the end of the working period. What methodology does this describe?
Which of the following statements is not true regarding EEFs and OPAs?
You work for a large manufacturing plant. Your firm is thinking of initiating a new project to release an overseas product line. This is the company's first experience in the overseas market, and it wants to make a big splash with the introduction of this product. The project entails producing your product in a concentrated formula and packaging it in smaller containers than the U.S. product uses. A new machine is needed in order to mix the first set of ingredients in the concentrated formula. Which of the following actions is the next best step the project sponsor should take?
According to the PMBOK(R) Guide, all of the following options concerning the benefits management plan are true except for which one?
Your nonprofit organization is preparing to host its first annual 5 K run/walk in City Park. You worked on a similar project for the organization two years ago when it cohosted the 10 K run through Overland Pass. Which of the organizational process assets might be most helpful to you on your new project?
Which of the following lists of processes belong to the Project Integration Management Knowledge Area?
Which of the following describes project approval requirements?
You are the project manager for the Late Night Smooth Jazz Club chain, with stores in 12 states. Smooth Jazz is considering opening a new club in Kansas City or Spokane. You have derived the following information: Project Kansas City: The payback period is 27 months, and the IRR is 6 percent. Project Spokane: The payback period is 25 months, and the IRR is 5 percent. W hich project should you recommend to the selection committee?
Which of the following is not true regarding the purpose of a business case?
You are in the process of analyzing and visually representing your stakeholders. All of the following are true regarding these tools and techniques except for which one?
You are a project manager for Laredo Pioneer's Traveling Rodeo Show. You're heading up a project to promote a new line of souvenirs to be sold at the shows. You are getting ready to write the project management plan and know you need to consider elements such as policies, rules, systems, relationships, and norms in the organization. Which of the following is not true?
You are a project manager responsible for the construction of a new office complex. You are taking over for a project manager who recently left the company. The prior project manager completed the project scope statement and scope management plan for this project. In your interviews with some key team members, you conclude which of the following?
Unanimity, majority, plurality, and autocratic are four examples of which of the following techniques?
Which of the following makes up the scope baseline when using a predictive life-cycle approach?
Your project depends on a key deliverable from a vendor you've used several times before with great success. You're counting on the delivery to arrive on June 1. This is an example of a/an .
You are the project manager for Changing Tides video games. You have produced a project schedule network diagram and have updated the project documents, including the activity list, activity attributes, assumption log, and milestone list. Which process have you just finished?
You are working on a project that requires resources with expertise in the areas of hospitality, management, and entertainment. You are preparing your project schedule network diagram and know that you will use only finish-to-start dependencies. Which of the following diagramming methods does this describe?
You are a project manager for Picture Shades, Inc. Your company manufactures window shades that have replicas of Renaissance-era paintings for hotel chains. Picture Shades is taking its product to the home market, and you're managing the new project. It will offer its products at retail stores as well as on its website. You're developing the project schedule for this undertaking. Looking at the following graph, which path is the critical path? 7 5 B C 10 14 2 8 A D E H 7 6 F G
Use the following graphic to answer this question. If the duration of activity B was changed to 10 days and the duration of activity G was changed to 9 days, which path is the critical path? 7 5 B C 10 14 2 8 A D E H 7 6 F G Review Questions 233
You are the project manager working on a research project for a new drug treatment. Your preliminary project schedule runs past the due date for a federal grant application. The manager of the R&D department has agreed to release two resources to work on your project to meet the federal grant application date. This is an example of .
All of the following are true regarding the stakeholder engagement plan except for which one?
Which of the following options is the key component of determining cost estimates and should be completed as early in the project as possible?
You want to improve your cost estimates by taking into account estimation uncertainty and risk. Which of the following tools and techniques will you use?
You have received the following estimates for a complex activity that is critical to the success of your project. The three-point estimates are as follows: The most likely estimate is $42, the optimistic estimate is $35, and the pessimistic estimate is $54. What is the expected activity cost of this activity using the beta distribution formula (rounded to the nearest dollar)?
You are the project manager for a custom home-building construction company. You are working on the model home project for the upcoming Show Homes Tour. The model home includes smart home connections, talking appliances, and wiring for home theaters. You are working on the cost baseline for this project. All of the following statements are true except which one?
Your project sponsor has requested a cost estimate for the project. She would like the cost estimate to be as accurate as possible because this might be her one and only chance to secure the budget for this project because of recent cuts in special projects. You decide to use .
You are the project manager for a custom-home-building construction company. You are working on the model home project for the upcoming Show Homes Tour. The model home includes smart home connections, talking appliances, and wiring for home theaters. You are working on the Determine Budget process. All of the following statements are true except which one?
Which of the following is displayed as an S-curve?
Your project sponsor has requested a cost estimate for the project on which you're working. This project is similar in scope to a project you worked on last year. She would like to get the cost estimates as soon as possible. Accuracy is not her primary concern right now. She needs a ballpark figure by tomorrow. You decide to use .
You are a project manager for Fountain of Youth Spring Water bottlers. Your project involves installing a new accounting system, and you're performing the risk-planning processes. You have identified a variability risk and ambiguity risk. Which of the following is not true regarding these risks?
You are using the representations of uncertainty technique of the Perform Quantitative Risk Analysis process. All of the following statements are true regarding this technique except for which one?
You are performing the Perform Qualitative Risk Analysis process and want to display proximity and connectivity and their impacts on the project. Which of the following methods will you use?
You are using criticality analysis to determine risk impact. You have calculated an index for each risk and realize the more activities the risk impacts, the higher the index. The index is used as an input to a simulation. Which risk does criticality analysis assess?
You've identified a risk event on your current project that could save $500,000 in project costs if it occurs. Your organization is considering hiring a consulting firm to help establish proper project management techniques in order to ensure it realizes these savings. Which of the following is true based on this statement?
Your project team has identified several potential risks on your current project that could have a significant impact if they occurred. The team examined the impact of the risks by keeping all the uncertain elements at their baseline values. Which of the following will the team use to display this information?
You are using a defined set of risk categories to determine both individual risks and overall project risks. You will also use PESTLE, a strategic analysis tool to assist in determining overall project risk. You are also using the lowest level of the RBS to help in constructing which of the following based on the information in this question?
All of the following statements are true regarding the Plan Resource Management process except for which one?
Which of the following are constraints that you might find during the Plan Resource Management process?
Four people are responsible for establishing cost of quality theories. Crosby and Juran are two them, and their theories are , respectively.
The theory that 85 percent of the cost of quality is a management problem is attributed to .
You are a project manager for a growing dairy farm business. It offers organic dairy products regionally and is expanding its operations to the West Coast. It's in the process of purchasing and leasing dairy farm businesses to get operations underway. The subproject manager in charge of network operations has reported some hardware problems to you. You're also having problems coordinating and integrating other elements of the project. Which of the following statements is true?
You are in the process of making project team assignments. You have several candidates for a position on the project team that requires specific qualifications. All the candidates seem to meet the qualifications. You also consider prior experience, their interest in the project, cost rates, and availability of these potential candidates. Which of the following is true?
During a recent team meeting, you reached a resolution to an issue that's been troubling the team for several weeks. It turned out that there was a problem with one of the manufactured parts required for the project. Once this was corrected, the remaining production run went off without a hitch. You took responsibility for searching out the facts of this problem and implemented a change request to resolve the issue. Which of the following is true regarding this question?
When working in a matrix environment, all of the following are true regarding the Manage Team process except for which one?
You are a project manager for Fountain of Youth Spring Water bottlers. Your project involves installing a new accounting system. You have identified several problems and want to brainstorm the causes of those problems with the project team because there isn't sufficient quantitative data to analyze the problems. Which of the following diagrams will you use to outline each problem, including the causes and effects of the problems?
You are a contract project manager for a wholesale flower distribution company. Your project involves developing a website for the company to allow retailers to place their flower orders online. You will also provide a separate link for individual purchases that are ordered, packaged, and mailed to the consumer directly from the grower's site. This project involves coordinating the parent company, growers, and distributors. You've discovered a problem with one of the technical processes needed to perform this project. You examine elements such as constraints, problems, and activities that don't add value to the project in order to identify process improvements and reduce or eliminate the problems with the technical processes. Which of the following is true?
You are performing the Manage Quality process and establishing expected values for the dependent relationships in the hierarchy. Which technique are you using?
You are working on a project and discover that one of the business users responsible for testing the product never completed this activity. She has written an email requesting that one of your team members drop everything to assist her with a problem that could have been avoided if she had performed the test. This employee reports to a stakeholder, not to the project team. All project team members and stakeholders are colocated. Because your team also needs her to participate in an upcoming test, you decide to do which of the following?
Contracts are part of which of the following outputs of the Conduct Procurements process?
According to the PMBOK (R) Guide, this party is responsible for managing stakeholder expectations.
Which of the following processes is responsible for reporting and comparing actual project results against the project management plan, analyzing performance data to determine if action needs to be taken, and monitoring approved change requests among other functions?
You are working on a project and discover that one of the business users responsible for testing the product never completed this activity. She has written an email requesting that one of your team members drop everything to assist her with a problem that could have been avoided if she had performed the test. This employee reports to a stakeholder, not to the project team. You estimate that the project might not be completed on time as a result of this missed activity. Which of the following actions should you take?
What is the difference between inspections and audits in the Control Procurements process?
All of the following are tools and techniques of the Monitor Communications process except which one?
Your project is progressing as planned. You are conducting a status meeting and are reviewing items that need resolution. You have asked the owners of these items to report their progress and are tracking the due dates for their resolution. Which input of the Monitor Communications process does this describe?
Which system centrally manages approved changes to the specifications of the deliverables or the project management processes?
You are the project manager for a top-secret software project for an agency of the United States government. Getting top-secret clearances for contractors takes quite a bit of time, and waiting for clearances would jeopardize the implementation date. Your mission-should you choose to accept it--is to complete the project using internal resources. Your programmers are 80 percent of the way through the programming and testing work when your agency appoints a new executive director. Your programmers are siphoned off this project to work on the executive director's hot new project. Which of the following addresses the purpose of Validate Scope in this case?
Your project progressed as planned until yesterday. Suddenly, an unexpected risk event occurred. You quickly devised a response to deal with this negative risk event using which of the following?
Which of the following describes the Control Resources process?
You are a project manager for Dutch Harbor Consulting. Your latest project involves the upgrade of an organization's operating system on 236 servers. You performed this project under contract. You are in the Close Project or Phase process and know that you should document and file which of the following?
You are a project manager for Dutch Harbor Consulting. Your latest project involves the upgrade of an organization's operating system on 236 servers. You performed this project under contract. You are in the Close Project or Phase process and have reviewed the contracting documents to identify lessons learned. What is the name of the tool and technique you will use to perform this function?
This tool and technique of the Close Project or Phase process looks at project variables and how they contributed to project outcomes. This is for the purpose of improving performance on future projects.
You are a project manager for a telecommunications firm. You're working on a project that entails upgrading technical hardware and equipment. The estimated cost of the hardware and equipment is $1,725,000. You are reviewing products from three vendors. One of the vendors offers you and your family the use of the company yacht for the upcoming threeday weekend. What is the most appropriate response?
Life seems to be going very well for your close friend, a project manager, who like you has PMP (R) certification. She has taken a trip to France, purchased a new car, and stocked her wine cellar with a couple dozen expensive bottles of wine, all within the last six months. After a few cocktails one evening, she tells you her secret. The vendor she's working with on the $4 billion project she's managing has given her all of these items as gifts. Which scenario is the most appropriate?
The following are characteristics of a project, except:
When is a project considered successful?
You are currently managing multiple projects relating to a high-profile build-out of a major retail center. The project is extensive, with a two-year timeline. Bob is the project manager responsible for the east block of the build-out, and Sally is the project manager responsible for the north block of the build-out. Both Bob and Sally report to you. Your role can best be described as:
Which of the following organizational types is the oldest style of organization?
A project management office (PMO) is responsible for the following activities, except:
During a planning meeting, a discussion takes place to decide which resource will be assigned to perform an activity that will be fast-tracked. As the project manager, you unilaterally decide to assign Fred to the activity. What type of organizational structure is this?
All of the following are process groups, except:
During which process group are costs the highest?
The concept that each element within a cycle is results oriented and becomes an input into the next cycle describes which of the following?
All of the following statements are true, except:
Which of the following best describes the level of authority that a project manager has within a functional organization?
The PMBOK(R) Guide suggests that all projects follow these phases of the project life cycle. Which answer represents the phases of the project life cycle?
General management skills are necessary foundation for the work of a project manager. Which of the following are not general management skills a project manager would need?
What two actions are performed as a part of the Initiating process group?
What two actions are performed as a part of the Closing process group?
Identify Stakeholders, Plan Stakeholder Management, and Control Stakeholder Engagement are all processes of which Knowledge Area?
Ron is the project manager of a pharmaceutical company that develops multiple products to help fight diseases affecting children. There are currently two new drugs that the company is planning to develop within the next two years. Ron has been tasked with determining which of the two drugs has the greatest opportunity for success in today's marketplace. This is an example of which of the following?
Your manager has recently given you the responsibility of selecting the next project, which you will manage as the project manager. There are currently three projects on hold to choose from. Using the weighted scoring models method, you determine that Project A has a weighted score of 16, Project B has a weighted score of 14, and Project C has a weighted score of 17. Which project do you choose?
What type of project selection method is multi-objective programming?
What is $5,525 four years from now worth today given a 10 percent interest rate?
Which of the following best describes the characteristics of the product, service, or result of the project?
All of the following are inputs to the Develop Project Charter process except:
Maryann has just wrapped up the final draft of the project charter and emailed a copy to the appropriate individuals. A kick-off meeting in two days has already been scheduled to complete the project charter, with all those involved having accepted the meeting invitation. What will Maryann need done during the kick-off meeting to complete the project charter?
All of the following are inputs to the Identify Stakeholders process except:
The stakeholder register can best be described as:
Polly is a project manager tasked with leading a project that will establish business continuity management practices for a major retail coffee chain. With the guidance of the sponsor, she drafts a document that authorizes her to begin assigning resources to the project once signed. What process will Polly likely perform next?
Power/interest grid, salience model, and influence/impact grid are all examples of which of the following techniques?
All of the following are processes of the Project Scope Management Knowledge Area except:
Beans by the Dozen is a company that ships precooked beans to restaurants in the Western United States. Recently, the company has decided to expand their operation to the Northern regions of the country. A business case was developed, citing market demand, and a project manager was informally assigned to formalize and kick off the project. What is the project manager likely to do first?
Project scope can best be defined as which of the following?
Product scope is measured against the product specifications whereas project scope is measured against which of the following?
Beans by the Dozen is a company that ships precooked beans to restaurants in the Western United States. June is the project manager assigned to lead the expansion of the company's operation. As part of performing stakeholder analysis, she lists all of the known stakeholders and includes various notes about each in a register. What is June likely to do next?
Life-cycle costing is defined as:
Which of the following Knowledge Areas is responsible for linking the processes across the project management process groups?
Polly is a project manager tasked with leading a project that will establish business continuity management practices for a major retail coffee chain. With the guidance of the sponsor, she drafts a document that authorizes her to begin assigning resources to the project once signed. What process is Polly performing?
All of the following are subsidiary elements of the project management plan except
Which of the following best describes a focus group?
Sam is currently in the planning stages of a project and is working on developing the project scope statement. As part of converting the product scope description into deliverables, he has used the product breakdown and systems analysis techniques. Which of the following tools and techniques of the Define Scope process is Sam currently using?
The following are included within the WBS dictionary except
While sequencing activities, a project manager decides to use the precedence diagramming method to show existing dependencies between activities. Which of the logical relationships is the project manager most likely to use?
Rodrigo is in the Plan Communications Management process of a new systems component project. He has determined that there are 32 stakeholders in the project. How many communication channels exist?
What is the purpose of the Perform Qualitative Risk Analysis process?
Which type of contract carries the highest risk for the buyer?
Which of the following quality theorists devised the zero defects practice?
All of the following are tools and techniques of the Plan Quality Management process except
The scope management plan should contain the following information except
Which of the following is the purpose of collecting requirements?
What is the correct definition of a project constraint?
What is the correct definition of a critical path task?
What is the cost baseline?
Which definition of the cost of quality (COQ) is correct?
All of the following are benefits of meeting quality requirements except
All of the following are determined by the Plan Human Resources Management process except
All of the following are outputs of the Plan Procurement Management process except
All of the following define the purpose of the Identify Risks process except
Jon is gearing up for his upcoming project, which involves programming a complex system that will allow two programs to talk to each other. The project kicks off in one week, and he had been specifically requested by the customer. As a software architect, this will be his most challenging project yet, and he has been looking forward to the assignment for months. Which of the following options best describes Jon's upcoming project role?
All of the following are benefits of virtual teams except
At which stage of team development do employees compete for control?
Sally, a junior project manager for Project Red, is in the process of holding a status meeting for the project manager, who stepped out to deal with a procurement issue. The tension in the room has been high because two critical resources suddenly quit. John and Rick, both team members, have been arguing for five minutes over who will take over the tasks. Sally has tried to interject multiple times with no success. The side conversations don't make managing the meeting any easier. What is the most likely cause of the inefficient meeting?
Which of the following levels within Maslow's hierarchy of needs describes the need to belong?
Which of the following conflict management techniques is said to be the best strategy?
Meetings, email, videoconferences, and conference calls are all examples of which of the following options?
The project team of a new housing expansion project is in a state of frenzy because of a surprise quality audit that is being conducted today on the project. In three days, a major deliverable is due. The project manager explains to the team that the quality audit is important. What reasoning is the project manager likely to give the team for explaining why quality audits are needed in a project?
Who is responsible for defining Theory X & Y?
The following are tools and techniques of the Manage Stakeholder Engagement process except
Beans by the Dozen is a company that ships precooked beans to restaurants in the Western United States. Recently, the company has decided to expand their operation to the Northern regions of the country. The project manager assigned to the project has just instituted a war room to bring project team members together and has concluded a 264a*... Chapter 4a* a* Executing the Project teambuilding session after collocating the team. What process is the project manager carrying out?
Through which process group is the majority of the project budget consumed?
Polly is a project manager tasked with leading a project that will establish business continuity management practices for a major retail coffee chain. She has just concluded planning efforts on the project and is gearing up to begin executing the work of the project. What is she likely to do first?
Which of the following tools and techniques provides an opportunity for prospective Avendors to ask sellers questions about an RFP?
A deliverable can best be described as
A project manager has just gathered the status of project activities and calculated resource consumption to date. What process is the project manager carrying out?
The issue log is first created as a result of which process?
The following represent the results generated from carrying out the Direct and Manage Project Work process except
The following are inputs used to carry out the Perform Quality Assurance process except
Polly is a project manager tasked with leading a project that will establish business continuity management practices for a major retail coffee chain. By facilitating quality audits, the project team recently discovered corrective action needed to bring the project into compliance with quality requirements. How will Polly process the corrective action?
The Monitor and Control Project Work process results in all of the following except
A project manager of a technical training company is working on a project that will automate the company's course registration process. Due to the expertise involved, the company hired an external vendor to create the backend development of the registration system. While monitoring the project work, the project manager discovered that the vendor was two weeks behind schedule and about to miss an important milestone. What tool and technique did the project manager use to make this determination?
All of the following processes integrate with the Control Procurements process except
Which of the following best describes the contract change control system?
While conducting earned value management, the project manager of a software development company receives a request from a stakeholder for the most current cost estimate report. Specifically, the stakeholder needs to know the value of the work completed against actual cost. Which formula will the project manager use to calculate this information?
During a project status meeting, the project manager provided the room of stakeholders with results of a recent quality audit. After the group discussed the results, it was determined that a minor adjustment needed to be made to bring the variance levels under control. The project sponsor, also a meeting participant, agreed and gave her approval to implement the changes immediately. What should the project manager do next?
After the implementation of yet another risk response plan, the project manager became concerned about whether the budget was sufficient enough to cover the remaining identified risks. Which of the following tools and techniques can the project manager use to evaluate the status of the budget in terms of risk?
If budget at completion (BAC) is 1,500 and estimate at completion (EAC) is 1,350, what is the current variance at completion (VAC)?
A project manager is in the process of determining the existing variance between the schedule baseline and actual schedule. To determine the variance, the project manager used schedule variance (SV) and schedule performance index (SPI). The project manager is currently in what process?
What level of accuracy does 3 sigma represent?
Assuming that the work will proceed as planned, what is the estimate to complete (ETC) if the estimate at completion (EAC) is $250,000 and actual cost (AC) is $50,000?
What does the to-complete performance index (TCPI) value tell you?
Which process is responsible for ensuring that communication requirements of stakeholders are met?
Polly is a project manager tasked with leading a project that will establish business continuity management practices for a major retail coffee chain. The disaster recovery procedures deliverable has just been verified. What process is Polly likely to take the deliverable through next?
Polly is a project manager tasked with leading a project that will establish business continuity management practices for a major retain coffee chain. She has been asked by the project sponsor to provide an update of the expected total cost of the project work. Currently, the project is expected to continue to experience steady performance. What value will Polly report at the next meeting if the BAC = $500,000, EV = $300,000, and AC = $350,000?
If earned value (EV) is 20,000 and planned value (PV) is 35,000, what can you determine about the project?
Beans by the Dozen is a company that ships precooked beans to restaurants in the Western United States. Recently, the company has decided to expand their operation to the Northern regions of the country. Ben, the project manager, has just implemented three changes approved by the change control board. What is Ben likely to do next in regard to these changes?
Based on the following information, what can you determine about the project? Earned value (EV) = 160,000, actual cost (AC) = 110,000, planned value = 175,000
All of the following are outputs of the Control Stakeholder Engagement process except
Beans by the Dozen is a company that ships precooked beans to restaurants in the Western United States. Recently, the company has decided to expand their operation to the Northern regions of the country. The project is currently behind schedule, and the project manager has just been asked to work his magic to get the project back on track. If earned value (EV) is $60,000, actual cost (AC) is $85,000, and planned value (PV) is $75,000, what options are available to the project manager?
All of the following are inputs of the Close Project or Phase process except
A project manager of a travel excursion company is currently working on confirming that all project deliverables have been successfully completed to transfer the project to the customer. What process is the project currently in?
When closing out a project or project phase, which of the following tools and techniques can be used to ensure that closure has been performed to the appropriate standards?
The Close Procurements process accomplishes all of the following except
While conducting project closure activities, a relatively new project manager of a white board production company becomes confused as to how the organization verifies that the existing criteria have been met. The project manager has found that some of the procedures followed by the organization are different from previous companies she's worked for. Where can the project manager go to clarify the procedures for verifying that the exit criteria have been met?
All of the following are tools and techniques of the Close Procurements process except
Procurement audits are concerned with which of the following?
A project manager was in the midst of trying to resolve a dispute with one of the project's largest vendors. The issue revolved around the responsibility of the vendor to comply with changes to the scope. Although this was addressed in the contract, the vendor felt that the scope changes were much larger than the scope of the contract itself. What would be the best way to resolve the dispute?
Project managers have the greatest amount of influence during which stage of the project?
Resource release criteria can best be found in which plan?
A major deliverable has just been signed off by the sponsor. What is the project manager likely to do next?
Polly is a project manager tasked with leading a project that will establish business continuity management practices for a major retail coffee chain. The project's sponsor has just informed Polly that due to a major health safety issue discovered, all resources will be pulled from her project for an indefinite amount of time. In this scenario, Polly's project has just been terminated due to what type of project ending?
Polly is a project manager tasked with leading a project that will establish business continuity management practices for a major retail coffee chain. The project's sponsor has just informed Polly that due to a major health safety issue discovered, all resources will be pulled from her project for an indefinite amount of time. What is Polly likely to do next?
The Close Project or Phase process belongs to which project management Knowledge Area?
Beans by the Dozen is a company that ships precooked beans to restaurants in the Western United States. Recently, the company has decided to expand their operation to the Northern regions of the country. Ben, the project manager, confirmed that the vendor has recently completed all deliverables outlined within the statement of work and passed a recent audit. Which document is Ben likely to use as a guide to closing out the contract?
The VP of marketing approaches you and requests that you change the visitor logon screen on the company's website to include a username with at least six characters. This is considered ___________________.
Your company manufactures small kitchen appliances. They are introducing a new product line of appliances in designer colors with distinctive features for kitchens in small spaces. These new products will be offered indefinitely starting with the spring catalog release. Which of the following is true?
Your company manufactures small kitchen appliances. It is introducing a new product line of appliances in designer colors with distinctive features for kitchens in small spaces. These new products will be offered indefinitely starting with the spring catalog release. In order to determine the characteristics and features of the new product line, you will have to perform which of the following?
A project is considered successful when ___________________.
The VP of customer service has expressed concern over a project you're involved in. His specific concern is that if the project is implemented as planned, he'll have to purchase additional equipment to staff his customer service center. The cost is substantial and was not taken into consideration in the project budget. The project sponsor insists that the project must go forward as originally planned or the customer will suffer. Which of the following is true?
Which of the following brings together a set of tools and techniques used to describe, organize, and monitor the work of project activities?
The Project Integration Management knowledge area is made up of which of the following processes?
You are the project manager for Fun Days vacation packages. Your new project assignment is to head up the Fun Days resort opening in Austin, Texas. You are estimating the duration of the project plan activities, devising the project schedule, and monitoring and controlling deviations from the schedule. Which of the Project Management Knowledge Areas are you working in?
You are the project manager for a large construction project. The project objective is to construct a set of outbuildings to house the Olympic support team that will be arriving in your city 18 months from the project start date. Resources are not readily available as they are currently assigned to other projects. Jack, an expert crane operator, is needed for this project two months from today. Which of the following skills will you use to get Jack assigned to your project?
You've decided to try your hand at project management in the entertainment industry. You're working on a movie production and the team has just completed the storyboard phase of the project. Which of the following is true?
You are managing a project to install a new postage software system that will automatically print labels and administer postage for certified mailings, overnight packages, and other special mailing needs. You've attempted to gain the cooperation of the business analyst working on this project and need some answers. She is elusive and tells you that this project is not her top priority. What should you do to avoid situations like this in the future?
The amount of authority a project manager possesses can be related to ___________________.
You have been assigned to a project in which the objectives are to expand three miles of the north-south highway through your city by two lanes in each direction. You are in charge of the demolition phase of this project, and you report to the project manager in charge of this project. You have been hired on contract and will be released at the completion of the demolition phase. What type of organizational structure does this represent?
You have been assigned to a project in which the objectives are to expand three miles of the northsouth highway through your city by two lanes in each direction. You are interested in implementing a new project process called Design-Build in order to speed up the project schedule. The idea is that the construction team will work on the first mile of the highway reconstruction at the same time the design team is coming up with plans for the third mile of the reconstruction rather than completing all design before any construction begins. This is an example of ___________________.
During which project management process are risk and stakeholder's ability to influence project outcomes the highest at the beginning of the process?
You've been hired as a manager for the Adjustments Department of a nationwide bank based in your city. The Adjustments Department is responsible for making corrections to customer accounts. This is a large department, with several smaller sections that deal with specific accounts; for example, personal checking or commercial checking. You've received your first set of management reports and can't make heads or tails of the information. Each section appears to use a different methodology to audit their work and record the data for the management report. You request a project manager from the PMO to come down and get started right away on a project to streamline this process and make the data and reports consistent. This project came about as a result of which of the following?
You work for a large manufacturing plant. Your firm is thinking of initiating a new project to release an overseas product line. This is the company's first experience in the overseas market, and it hopes to make a big splash with the introduction of this product. The project entails producing your product in a concentrated formula and packaging it in smaller containers than the U.S. product uses. A new machine is needed in order to mix the first set of ingredients in the concentrated formula. Which of the following actions should the project manager take?
Which of the following lists the inputs and the tools and techniques that the two processes within the Initiating process group share?
According to A Guide to the PMBOK, the project statement of work should contain or reference all of the following elements except for which one?
Your nonprofit organization is preparing to host its first annual 5K run/walk in City Park. You worked on a similar project for the organization two years ago when it cohosted the 10K run through Overland Pass. Which of the organizational process assets might be helpful to you on your new project?
Which of the following is true regarding product scope descriptions?
You are the project manager for the Late Night Smooth Jazz Club chain, with stores in 12 states. Smooth Jazz is considering opening a new club in Arizona or Nevada. You have derived the following information: Project Arizona: Payback period is 18 months, and the NPV is <250>. Project Nevada: Payback period is 24 months, and the NPV is 300. Which project would you recommend to the selection committee?
You are the project manager for the Late Night Smooth Jazz Club chain, with stores in 12 states. Smooth Jazz is considering opening a new club in Kansas City or Spokane. You have derived the following information: Project Kansas City: The payback period is 27 months, and the IRR is 35 percent. Project Spokane: The payback period is 25 months, and the IRR is 32 percent. Which project should you recommend to the selection committee?
Mathematical models using linear, dynamic, integer, or algorithm models are considered ___________________.
You are a project manager for Zippy Tees. Your selection committee has just chosen a project you recommended for implementation. Your project is to manufacture a line of miniature stuffed bears that will be attached to your company's trendy T-shirts. The bears will be wearing the same T-shirt design as the shirt they're attached to. Your project sponsor thinks you've really impressed the big boss and wants you to skip to the manufacturing process right away. What is your response?
You are a project manager for Laredo Pioneer's Traveling Rodeo Show. You're heading up a project to promote a new line of souvenirs to be sold at the shows. You are getting ready to write the project management plan and know that all of the following are true regarding the PMIS, except for which one?
You are a project manager for Laredo Pioneer's Traveling Rodeo Show. You're heading up a project to promote a new line of souvenirs to be sold at the shows. You're ready to document the processes you'll use to perform the project as well as define how the project will be executed, controlled, and closed. Which of the following is true?
Some of the functions of this process include describing the methods for executing the work of the project to fulfill the project objectives, documenting dependencies and interactions among the processes, determining the validity of and maintaining the performance baselines, and determining key management reviews for pending decisions. Which of the following does this describe? Choose the best answer.
You are a project manager for an agricultural supply company. You have just completed and obtained sign-off on the project scope statement for your new Natural Bug Busters project. A key stakeholder has informed you that a deliverable is missing from the project scope statement. This deliverable is a critical success factor. Which of the following actions should you take?
Your company has asked you to be the project manager for the product introduction of its new DeskTop Rock media system. You recently published a document that establishes the detailed project deliverables. Which of the following is true?
Your company has asked you to be the project manager for the product introduction of its new DeskTop Rock media system. You recently published the project scope statement. Which of the following is not contained in the project scope statement?
You are a project manager for Giraffe Enterprises. You've recently taken over for a project manager who lied about his PMI certification and was subsequently fired. Unfortunately, he did a poor job of scope definition. Which of the following could happen if you don't correct this?
You work for a large manufacturing plant. You're working on a new project for an overseas product release. This is the company's first experience in the overseas market, and it hopes to make a big splash with the introduction of this product. The project entails producing your product in a concentrated formula and packaging it in smaller containers than the U.S. product uses. A new machine is needed in order to mix the first set of ingredients in the concentrated formula. Which of the following is true?
Objectives can be described as all of the following except for which one? Choose the least correct answer.
You are a project manager working on a new software product your company plans to market to businesses. The project sponsor told you that the project must be completed by September 1. The company plans to demo the new software product at a trade show in late September and therefore needs the project completed in time for the trade show. However, the sponsor has also told you that the budget is fixed at $85,000 and it would take an act of Congress to get it increased. You must complete the project within the given time frame and budget. Which of the following is the primary constraint for this project?
All of the following are true regarding stakeholder analysis except for which one?
You are in the process of translating project objectives into tangible deliverables and requirements. All of the following are techniques used in the product analysis tool and technique of the Scope Definition process, except for which one?
You are a project manager for a documentary film company. In light of a recent regional tragedy, the company president wants to get a new documentary on the rescue efforts of the heroic rescue teams to air as soon as possible. She's looking to you to make this documentary the best that's ever been produced in the history of this company. She guarantees you free rein to use whatever resources you need to get this project done quickly. However, the best photographer in the company is currently working on another assignment. Which of the following is true?
You are a project manager for Giraffe Enterprises. You've recently taken over for a project manager who lied about his PMI certification and was subsequently fired. Unfortunately, he didn't create a project charter or a preliminary scope statement. You are ready to elaborate the deliverables and requirements of the project and know that you can use one of the following in place of the charter or preliminary scope statement. Which one can you use?
You are working on a project that is similar in scope to a project performed last year by your company. You might consider which of the following?
Your company, Kick That Ball Sports, has appointed you project manager for its new Cricket product line introduction. This is a national effort, and all the retail stores across the country need to have the new products on the shelves before the media advertising blitz begins. The product line involves three new products, two of which will be introduced together and a third one that will follow within two years. You are ready to create the WBS. All of the following are true expect for which one?
Your company, Kick That Ball Sports, has appointed you project manager for its new Cricket product line introduction. This is a national effort, and all the retail stores across the country need to have the new products on the shelves before the media advertising blitz begins. The product line involves three new products, two of which will be introduced together and a third one that will follow within two years. Product number three will be elaborated in more detail closer to the product's release date, while the first two products will be elaborated in great detail now. The scope management plan has just been completed. Which of the following is true? (Choose the best response.)
You work for a large manufacturing plant. You are working on a new project to release an overseas product line. This is the company's first experience in the overseas market, and it hopes to make a big splash with the introduction of this product. The project entails producing your product in a concentrated formula and packaging it in smaller containers than the U.S. product uses. A new machine is needed in order to mix the ingredients into a concentrated formula. In order to complete the Create WBS process sufficiently, you decide to do which of the following?
You are the project manager for Lucky Stars nightclubs. They specialize in live country and western band performances. Your newest project is in the Planning process group. You've published the scope statement and scope management plan. The document that describes who will receive copies of this information as well as future project information, how it should be distributed, and who will prepare it is which of the following?
You've constructed the WBS for your recent project. You've requested that the subproject managers report back to you in three weeks with each of their individual WBSs constructed. Which statement is not true regarding the subproject managers' WBS?
All of the following are true regarding Communications Planning except for which one?
All of the following are true regarding the Quality Planning process except for which one?
Three people are responsible for establishing cost of quality theories. Crosby and Juran are two them, and their theories respectively are ___________________.
The theory that 85 percent of the cost of quality is a management problem is attributed to which of the following?
The quality management plan documents how the project team will implement the quality policy. It must address all of the following except which one?
You work for a furniture manufacturer. You're project is going to design and produce a new office chair. The chair will have the ability to function as a normal chair and also the ability to transform its occupant into an upright, kneeling position. The design team is trying to determine the combination of comfort and ease of transformation to the new position that will give the chair the best characteristics while keeping the costs reasonable. Several different combinations have been tested. This is an example of which of the following tools and techniques of Quality Planning?
You are a project manager for Fountain of Youth Spring Water bottlers. Your project involves installing a new accounting system and you're performing the risk-planning processes. You have identified several problems along with the causes of those problems. Which of the following diagrams will you use to show the problem and its causes and effects?
The process of assessing the probability and consequences of identified risks to the project objectives, assigning a risk score to each risk, and creating a list of prioritized risks describes which of the following processes?
You are using the interviewing technique of the Quantitative Risk Analysis process. You intend to use normal and lognormal distributions. All of the following statements are true regarding this question except which one?
The information-gathering techniques used in the Risk Identification process include all of the following except ___________________.
You are the project manager for a new website for the local zoo. You need to perform Qualitative Risk Analysis. When you've completed this process, you'll produce all of the following as part of the risk register update output except which one?
Your hardware vendor left you voicemail saying that a snowstorm in the Midwest will prevent your equipment from arriving on time. You identified a risk response strategy for this risk and have arranged for a local company to lease you the needed equipment until yours arrives. This is an example of which risk response strategy?
All of the following are elements of inputs of the Risk Identification process that you should evaluate except for which one?
You work for a large manufacturing plant. You are working on a new project to release an overseas product line. This is the company's first experience in the overseas market, and it hopes to make a big splash with the introduction of this product. The stakeholders are a bit nervous about the project and historically proceed cautiously and take a considerable amount of time to examine information before making a final decision. The project entails producing your product in a concentrated formula and packaging it in smaller containers than the U.S. product uses. A new machine is needed in order to mix the ingredients into a concentrated formula. After speaking with one of your stakeholders, you discover this will be the first machine your organization has purchased from your new supplier. Which of the following statements is true given the information in this question?
Your project team has identified several potential risks on your current project that could have a significant impact if they occurred. They examined the impact of the risks by keeping all the uncertain elements at their baseline values. What type of diagram will the team use to display this information?
Your project team is in the process of identifying project risks on your current project. They have the option to use all of the following tools and techniques to diagram some of these potential risks except for which one?
Your team has identified the risks on the project and determined their risk score. They're in the midst of determining what strategies to put in place should the risks occur. After some discussion, they've determined that the risk of losing their network administrator is a risk they'll just deal with if and when it occurs. While they think it's a possibility and the impact would be significant, they've decided to simply deal with it after the fact. Which of the following is true regarding this question?
All of the following are true regarding the Qualitative Risk Analysis process except which one?
You are the project manager for an outdoor concert event scheduled for one year from today. You're working on the procurement plan for the computer software program that will control the lighting and screen projections during the concert. You've decided to contract with a professional services company that specializes in writing custom software programs. You want to minimize the risk to the organization, so you'll opt for which contract type?
You are the project manager for Heart of Texas casual clothing company. It's introducing a new line of clothing called Black Sheep Ranch Wear. You will outsource the production of this clothing line to a vendor. The vendor has requested a contract SOW. All of the following statements are true except for which one?
You are the project manager for Heart of Texas casual clothing company. It's introducing a new line of clothing called Black Sheep Ranch Wear. You will outsource the production of this clothing line to a vendor. Your legal department has recommended you use a contract that reimburses the seller's allowable costs and builds in a bonus based on performance criteria they've outlined in their memo. Which of the following contract types will you use?
All of the following statements are true regarding the Human Resource Planning process except for which one?
Sally is a project manager working on a project that will require a specially engineered machine. There are only three manufactures who can make the machine to the specifications Sally needs. The price of this machine is particularly critical to this project. The budget is limited and there's not a chance of securing additional funds if the bids for the machine come in higher than budgeted. She's developing the evaluation criteria for the bidders' responses and knows all of the following are true except for which one?
Which of the following are constraints that you might find during the Human Resource Planning process?
You are the project manager for a scheduled version release of your company's software tracking product. You have identified resources according to their activities. You might want to display this information in which of the following?
You are the project manager for Design Your Web Site, Inc. Your company is designing the website for a national grocery store chain. You have your activity list in hand and several time estimates for each activity and are ready to diagram the activity dependencies. You should use which of the following?
You have been hired as a contract project manager for Grapevine Vineyards. Grapevine wants you to design an Internet wine club for its customers. Customers must register before being allowed to order wine over the Internet so that legal age can be established. You know that the module to verify registration must be written and tested using data from Grapevine's existing database. This new module cannot be tested until the data from the existing system is loaded. You are going to hire a vendor to perform the programming and testing tasks for this module to help speed up the project schedule. Since they'll have access to your customer list and potentially other trade secrets, you'll asked them to sign a nondisclosure agreement. This is an example of which of the following?
You are the project manager for BB Tops, a nationwide toy store chain. Your new project involves a creating a prototype display at several stores across the country. You are using a RACI chart to display individuals and activities. What does RACI stand for?
This process can directly influence the project schedule.
You are the project manager for BB Tops, a nationwide toy store chain. Your new project involves a creating a prototype display at several stores across the country. You are hiring a contractor for portions of the project. The contact stipulates that you'll pay all allowable costs and an 8 percent fee over and above the allowable costs at the end of the contract. All of the following describe this type of contract except for which one?
This process uses tools like decomposition and rolling wave planning to produce the activity list and other outputs. Due to the purpose of this process, which of the following is considered its primary input?
You are the project manager for Changing Tides video games. You have gathered the inputs for the Activity Duration Estimating process. Which of the following tools and techniques will you employ to produce the outputs for this process?
Your project sponsor has requested a cost estimate for the project you're working on. This project is similar in scope to a project you worked on last year. She would like to get the cost estimates as soon as possible. Accuracy is not her primary concern right now. She needs a ballpark figure by tomorrow. You decide to use ___________________ .
Your project's primary constraint is quality. In order to make certain the project team members don't feel too pressed for time and to avoid schedule risk, you decide to use which of the following activity estimating tools?
You have been hired as a contract project manger for Grapevine Vineyards. Grapevine wants you to design an Internet wine club for their customers. One of the activities for this project is the installation and testing of several new servers. You know from past experience it takes about 16 hours per server to accomplish this task. Since you're installing 10 new servers, you estimate this activity to take 160 hours. Which of the estimating techniques have you used?
Your project sponsor has requested a cost estimate for the project. She would like the cost estimate to be as accurate as possible because this might be her one and only chance to secure the budget for this project due to recent cuts in special projects. You decide to use _______________.
The project schedule is used to determine all of the following except which one?
You are a project manager for Picture Shades, Inc. It manufactures window shades that have replicas of Renaissance-era paintings on the inside for hotel chains. Picture Shades is taking its product to the home market, and you're managing the new project. It will offer its products at retail stores as well as on its website. You're developing the project schedule for this undertaking and have determined the critical path. Which of the following statements is true?
You are a project manager for Picture Shades, Inc. It manufactures window shades that have replicas of Renaissance-era paintings on the inside for hotel chains. Picture Shades is taking its product to the home market, and you're managing the new project. It will offer its products at retail stores as well as on its website. You're developing the project schedule for this undertaking. Looking at the following graph, which path is the critical path? 7 5 B C 10 14 2 8 A D E H 7 6 F G
If you know expected value is 500 and the standard deviation is 12, you can say with approximately a 95 percent confidence rating which of the following?
You are the project manager working on a research project for a new drug treatment. Your preliminary project schedule runs past the due date for a federal grant application. The manager of the R&D department has agreed to release two resources to work on your project in order to meet the federal grant application date. This is an example of ___________________ .
Obtaining formal project plan approval and sign-off is important for all of the following reasons except which one?
You are the project manager for a custom home-building construction company. You are working on the model home project for the upcoming Show Homes Tour. The model home includes Internet connections in every room and talking appliances. You are working on the cost budget for this project. All of the following statements are true except which one?
You are a project manager for a growing dairy farm. It offers its organic dairy products regionally and is expanding its operations to the West Coast. It is in the process of purchasing and leasing dairy farms to get operations under way. You are in charge of the network operations part of this project. An important deadline is approaching that depends on the successful completion of the testing phase. You've detected some problems with your hardware in the testing phase and discover that the hardware is not compatible with other network equipment. You take corrective action and exchange the hardware for more compatible equipment. Which of the following statements is true?
You are a project manager for a growing dairy farm. It offers its organic dairy products regionally and is expanding its operations to the West Coast. It's in the process of purchasing and leasing dairy farms to get operations under way. The subproject manager in charge of network operations has reported some hardware problems to you. You're also having some other problems coordinating and integrating other elements of the project. Which of the following statements is true?
You are in the process of making project staff assignments. You've got several candidates for a position on the project team that requires specific qualifications. All the candidates seem to meet the qualifications. You also consider personal interests, characteristics, and availability of these potential candidates. Which of the following is true?
Your project team consists of 12 people in the same building you're located in, 4 people from the West Coast office, 2 people from the Kansas City office, and 6 people from the London office. Your office works different hours than all the other offices. Additionally, not all of the resources in your building are available at the same times during the day. Three of the 12 team members work swing shift hours. You use tools like web conferencing and e-mail to distribute information to the team. Which of the following is true?
You are the project manager for a cable service provider. Your project team is researching a new service offering. They have been working together for quite some time and are in the performing stage of Develop Project Team. This stage of Develop Project Team is similar to which of the following?
Receivers in the communication model filter their information through all of the following except ___________________ .
Which conflict resolution technique do project managers use most often?
You have accumulated project information throughout the project and need to distribute some important information you just received. Which of the following is not an information distribution methods?
You know that the next status meeting will require some discussion and a decision for a problem that has surfaced on the project. In order to make the most accurate decision, you know that the number of participants in the meeting should be limited to ___________________ .
You are a project manager for Dakota Software Consulting Services. You're working with a major retailer that offers its products through mail-order catalogs. The company is interested in knowing customer characteristics, the amounts of first-time orders, and similar information. As a potential bidder for this project, you worked on the RFP response and submitted the proposal. When the selection committee received the RFP responses from all the vendors bidding on this project, they used a weighted system to make a selection. Which process did this occur in?
You have been asked to submit a proposal for a project that has been put out for bid. First, you attend the bidder conference to ask questions of the buyers and to hear the questions some of the other bidders will ask. Which of the following statements is true?
Which of the following tools and techniques of the Select Sellers process is used to check proposed pricing?
The tools and techniques of the Request Seller Responses process include all of the following except which one?
All of the following are tools and techniques of the Contract Administration process except for which one?
You are a project manager for an engineering company. Your company won the bid to add ramp-metering lights to several on-ramps along a stretch of highway at the south end of the city. You subcontracted a portion of the project to another company. The subcontractor's work involves digging the holes and setting the lamp poles in concrete. You discover, through an independent review, that the process the subcontractor uses to report their progress is inefficient. Which of the following is true?
You are a contract project manager for a wholesale flower distribution company. Your project involves developing a website for the company that allows retailers to place their flower orders online. You will also provide a separate link for individual purchases that are ordered, packaged, and mailed to the consumer directly from the grower's site. This project involves coordinating the parent company, growers, and distributors. You've discovered a problem with one of the technical processes needed to perform this project. You decide to perform root cause analysis to determine the cause of this problem and then recommended preventive actions. Which of the following is true?
When working in a matrixed environment, all of the following are true regarding the Manage Project Team process except for which one?
You are performing actions such as reporting and comparing actual project results against the project management plan, analyzing performance data and determining if corrective or preventive action should be recommended, documenting all appropriate product information throughout the life of the project, gathering and recording project information, and monitoring approved change requests. Which process are you performing?
You are collecting information regarding project progress and project accomplishments and reporting it to the stakeholders. You will manage these communication needs and resolve issues using the communication management plan as your guideline. Which of the following is true?
You are working on a project and discover that one of the business users responsible for testing the product never completed this activity. She's written an e-mail requesting that one of your team members drop everything to assist her with a problem that could have been avoided if she would have performed the test. This employee reports to a stakeholder, not to the project team. All project team members and stakeholders are collocated. Since your team needs her to also participate in an upcoming test, you decide to do which of the following?
You are working on a project and discover that one of the business users responsible for testing the product never completed this activity. She's written an e-mail requesting that one of your team members drop everything to assist her with a problem that could have been avoided if she would have performed the test. This employee reports to a stakeholder, not to the project team. You estimate that the project may not be completed on time as a result of this missed activity. All of the following are true except for which one?
All of the following are tools and techniques of the Performance Reporting process except which one?
You are a project manager for Bluebird Technologies. Bluebird writes custom billing applications for several industries. A schedule change has been requested. You know change is concerned with all of the following except which one?
You are a project manager for Laurel's Theater Productions. Your new project is coming in over budget and requires a cost change through the cost change control system. You know all of the following statements are true regarding Cost Control except for which one?
Which of the following is not an activity of configuration management during the Integrated Change Control process?
What are the performance measurements for the Schedule Control process?
This measurement is the value of the work that's been completed to date compared to the budget.
You do not expect the types of variances that have occurred on the project to date to continue. If BAC = 800, ETC = 275, PV = 300, ACC = 200, EV = 250, and CPIC = 1.25, what is the EAC?
You know that BAC = 375, PV = 300, AC = 200, and EVC = 250. Variances that have occurred on the project to date are not expected to continue. What is the ETC?
You expect the types of variances that have occurred on the project to date to continue. If BAC = 800, ETC = 275, PV = 300, ACC = 200, EV = 250, and CPIC = 1.25, what is the EAC?
You know that BAC = 500, PV = 325, ACC = 275, CPI = .9. and EV = 250 and that you are experiencing atypical variances. Variance at completion tells you which of the following?
You know that BAC = 500, PV = 325, ACC = 275, and EVC = 250 and that you are experiencing typical variances. What is ETC?
Your project progressed as planned up until yesterday. Suddenly, an unexpected risk event occurred. You quickly devised a response to deal with this negative risk event using which of the following outputs of Risk Monitoring and Control?
You are working on a project that was proceeding well until a manufacturing glitch occurred that requires corrective action. It turns out the glitch was an unintentional enhancement to the product, and the marketing people are absolutely crazy about its potential. The corrective action is canceled, and you continue to produce the product with the newly discovered enhancement. As the project manager, you know that a change has occurred to the project scope. Which of the following statements is true?
Your project has experienced some changes to the agreed-upon WBS elements. The changes were approved through the proper change control process. The WBS changes may in turn require which of the following?
You are the project manager for a top secret software project for an agency of the United States government. Your mission--should you choose to accept it--is to complete the project using internal resources. The reason is that finding contractors with top secret clearances takes quite a bit of time and waiting for clearances would jeopardize the implementation date. Your programmers are 80 percent of the way through the programming and testing work when your agency appoints a new executive director. Slowly but surely your programmers are taken off this project and reassigned to the executive director's hot new project. Which of the following type of project ending is this?
You are the project manager for a top secret software project for an agency of the United States government. Your mission--should you choose to accept it--is to complete the project using internal resources. The reason is that getting top secret clearances for contractors takes quite a bit of time and waiting for clearances would jeopardize the implementation date. Your programmers are 80 percent of the way through the programming and testing work when your agency appoints a new executive director. Your programmers are siphoned off this project to work on the executive director's hot new project. Which of the following addresses the purpose of Scope Verification in this case?
You are a project manager for Cinema Snicker Productions. Your company specializes in producing comedy films for the big screen. Your latest project has just been canceled due to budget cuts. Which of the following statements is true?
Which of the following processes are performed in the Closing process group and in what order?
You are a project manager for Dutch Harbor Consulting. Your latest project involved the upgrade of an organization's operating system on 236 servers. You performed this project under contract. You are in the Contract Closure process and know that you should document which of the following? (Choose the best response.)
You are a project manager for Dutch Harbor Consulting. Your latest project involved the upgrade of an organization's operating system on 236 servers. You performed this project under contract. You are in the Closing process and know that product verification is for what purpose?
You are a project manager for Dutch Harbor Consulting. Your latest project involved the upgrade of an organization's operating system on 236 servers. You performed this project under contract. You are in the Contract Closure process and have reviewed the contracting process to identify lessons learned. What is the name of the tool and technique of you used to perform this function?
You are a project manager for Penguin Software. Your company creates custom software programs for hospitals and large dental offices. You have just completed a project and are gathering the documentation of the product of the project. This might include all of the following except ___________________.
The outputs of the Close Project process include all of the following except for which one?
You have collected the work performance information for your project to be included in the project archives. What is the purpose of the work performance information?
Your project was just completed. Due to some unfortunate circumstances, the project was delayed, causing cost overruns at the end of the project. Which of the following statements is true?
Your project was just completed. Due to some unfortunate circumstances, the project was delayed, causing cost overruns at the end of the project. This information might be useful on future projects in all of the following activities except for which one?
Your project was just completed, accepted, and closed. As is customary for your organization, you conduct a post-implementation audit. The purpose of this audit includes all of the following except for which one?
Contract documentation is an input to both the Close Project and Contract Closure processes. Contract documentation might include all of the following except for which one?
Integrity in the project management field is accomplished through all of the following except which one?
You are a project manager for a manufacturing firm that produces Civil War-era replicas and memorabilia. You discover a design error during a test production run on your latest project. Which of the following is the most likely response to this problem?
You are a project manager for a telecommunications firm. You're working on a project that entails upgrading technical hardware and equipment. The estimated cost of the hardware and equipment is $1,725,000. You are reviewing products from three different vendors. One of the vendors invites you to lunch. What is the most appropriate response?
You are a project manager for a telecommunications firm. You're working on a project that entails upgrading technical hardware and equipment. The estimated cost of the hardware and equipment is $1,725,000. You are reviewing products from three different vendors. One of the vendors offers you and your family the use of the company yacht for the upcoming three-day weekend. What is the most appropriate response?
Life seems to be going very well for your close friend, a fellow PMP. She's taken a trip to France, bought a new car, and stocked her wine cellar with a half-dozen expensive bottles of wine, all within the last six months. After a few cocktails one evening, she tells you her secret. The vendor she's working with on the $4 billion project she's managing has given her all of these items as gifts. Which of the following should you do? (Choose the best answer.)
As a PMP, you will be required to comply with the PMP Code of Professional Conduct. This code refers to all of the following except which one?
You are a contract project manager working with the State of Bliss. Your latest project involves rewriting the Department of Revenue's income tax system. One of the key stakeholders is a huge movie buff, and she has the power to promote you into a better position at the conclusion of this project. She's discovered that one of her favorite superstars lives in the State of Bliss and therefore must file income tax returns in that state. She asks you to look up the account of this movie star. What is the most appropriate response?
As a PMP, you are required to comply with the PMP Code of Professional Conduct. Part of your responsibility concerns applying professional knowledge. All of the following are part of applying professional knowledge except for which one?
Your upcoming project includes project team members from a foreign country. In order to make certain that cultural differences don't interfere with team performance, thereby affecting the success of the project, your first course of action is to do which of the following?
You are a project manager for Pizza Direct, which is a retail pizza delivery store. Your company is competing with another retail store for the option of opening two new stores in a foreign country. You have been invited to dinner with the prospective foreign business partners and their spouses upon your arrival. You know that all of the following statements are generally true except for which one?
You are a project manager for Pizza Direct, which is a retail pizza delivery store. Your company is competing with another retail store for the option of opening two new stores in a foreign country. You've been told that it is culturally unacceptable to eat certain foods in this country. You know that one of these foods happens to be a secret ingredient in the pizza sauce. What is the most appropriate response?
You are a project manager for Pizza Direct, which is a retail pizza delivery store. Your company is competing with another retail store for the option of opening two new stores in a foreign country. You know, but have not yet informed your company, that you are going to go to work for the competitor, which happens to be bidding for this same opportunity. What is the most appropriate response?
You are the project manager for a new construction project in your city. Your longtime personal friend is bidding on the project. They've asked you to give them an indication of the budget for this project so that they do not overbid and lose the deal. What is the most appropriate response?
Change management systems deal with changes in project processes, baselines, etc. Configuration management systems deal with the changes in product characteristics. Which of the following statements is true regarding change management and configuration management systems?
You have been developing a next generation electric engine for high-speed electric trains. The project is 25% completed, you have spent 21% of your budget and you are slightly behind the schedule. The client is worried and asks you to provide him with the progress and forecasting report as soon as possible. So, you start collecting information such as the start and finish dates of scheduled activities, number of change requests, number of defects, actual costs, actual durations, etc. These are examples of:
You have been hired by ABC Inc. and appointed as a project manager for their new project. The project charter has been signed and currently you are busy with preparing a detailed description of your project and the product. The description is in detail, the final requirements are identified, the product boundaries are defined, and you have outlined what is included and what is excluded. Once you complete this process, which of the following documents will you not update next?
You have been given a project to construct a small dam. Currently, you are visiting your project stakeholders and asking about their needs and expectations. You also have had many workshops and brainstorming sessions with them. Which process is this?
You are working on a project to set up a call center for your client. The duration of the project is two years. One year has passed, however, only 40% of the work has been completed against the schedule, which says that by now 50% of the work should have been completed. To date, you have spent 60% of the budget. What is the cost performance index of the project?
You are in the middle of your project and working on a deliverable which is 90% completed. It is time for the yearly audit. A team of auditors are about to come and verify if you are following the process as defined or not. However, as the deliverable is about to be completed, you check it and measure all dimensions to find any possible dimensional defects. What process is this?
You are attending a monthly status meeting with your stakeholders. During the discussion with an influential stakeholder, he asks you about a particular deliverable, He would like to know why it is taking so long to deliver and who is responsible for it. To answer his query, you refer a document and call Tom, who was responsible for this deliverable. What document is this?
Your project is going full steam and to prepare a monthly report you collect some data and give it to John who is your team member. You ask him to provide you with work performance information. He analyzes the information, compiles the data, and gives you the requested information which includes the status of deliverables, the number of change requests, implementation status for change requests, and forecasted estimates to complete. Among this information, which does not represent the information you requested?
You are a risk manager of a project and the project manager has given you the responsibility of developing the risk management plan. So, you start collecting the risks and then you categorize them based on their impact on the project objectives. Afterward, you analyze them and develop the risk response plan for positive risks and negative risks. After developing these response plans, what will your next step be?
You have signed a contract with the client to provide manpower for 50 USD/hour. Moreover, you will also be reimbursed for any costs incurred, along with a fixed fee of 25,000 USD. What kind of contract is this?
You have been given a project to build a park for a local community. Currently you are developing approaches to involve project stakeholders based on their needs, expectations, interests, and potential impact on the project. Which of the following is not an output of this process?
Which of the following are the four basic elements of the PMI code of ethics and professional conduct?
In change management, CCB reviews the changes in processes or in the baseline and then make a decision to either approve or reject it. On the other hand, configuration control deals with any change in product specification and the processes. Which of the following activities is not included in the perform integrated change control process?
During the project execution, some people stole your consumables. You did not identify this threat earlier, though you were able to manage the situation through a workaround. This risk did not have much of an impact on your cost baseline but the schedule was impacted. Management is aware of the issue and to get the complete picture they insist you provide them the performance report. Which of the following information will you provide to them?
You have identified your project stakeholders and are now analyzing them with the help of a salience model in order to manage them effectively. Which of the following parameters are used in the salience model?
You have received an urgent call from management and they asked you to find the cost estimate of a new project. Since time is critical and you have to provide them with the cost estimate, which technique will you use to calculate the project cost?
While you are in the execution phase of your project, management informs you that some ISO certified people are coming to your project to see if you're complying with standards, policies, and procedure. This act is part of which of the following processes?
You are working in a matrix organization and managing a project. You are having trouble working with one deliverable so you ask the functional manager to send you two team members who are experts in dealing with this type of work. She agrees and provides you with two of her best employees. They have joined your project and you have given them their roles and responsibilities. They are also made aware of who will be responsible or accountable for each deliverable. However, they are still not clear about their roles and responsibilities. So, to make it clear what document or chart will you show them?
You met with your team member at a dinner party, where he discussed some issues regarding the project stakeholders. What kind of communication was this?
You have identified a risk that your work might be affected due to an equipment malfunction. Which of the following risk response strategies will you use to contain this risk?
Your company has signed up to build a high-tech machine in collaboration with ABC Corp in Japan. ABC Corp will provide the expert, technical know-how and any spare parts you may need. This is a very high-tech machine, the exact description of work is not yet clear, and you are building it for the first time. In this scenario what kind of contract will you select?
You have been appointed project manager of a project. The project charter is signed and you have started working on it. As the project is big and involves many stakeholders, you start identifying your project's stakeholders. The number of identified stakeholders is huge and you are worried about how you will manage such a large number of stakeholders effectively. Fortunately, the PMBOK Guide provides you with many strategies to manage stakeholders under all circumstances. In this case, which of the following models will you not use to develop the stakeholder management strategy?
You have floated a firm fixed price contract for some work. Since the scope of the work is not clear, the risk is higher and contractors are hesitant to bid for your contract. You are very busy and don't have time to monitor the contractor's bill. In this case, what kind of contract will you select?
You are on a committee and are in the process of selecting a project. This committee is asking tough and critical questions from team members. Which of the following project selection techniques is the committee using here?
The project charter is the document that authorizes the existence of the project and contains a great deal of important information. Which of the following options shows the correct content of a project charter?
You are in the define scope process and defining the detailed scope of the product and the project. This process helps you define the description of product, service or result and define boundaries and tells you about requirement inclusion and exclusion. Which of the following is not an outcome once the process ends?
What kind of dependency is shown in the given exhibit?
You are over budget and it seems difficult for you to complete with your current budget which is 250,000 USD. Considering your current cost performance will be the same as the future cost performance, you calculate your new budget as 300,000 USD. To date, you have spent 100,000 USD. What is the earned value?
There are many problems causing trouble for your project. You want to see the sources that are causing the majority of the problems for your project. Which diagram will you refer to in order to find this information?
You are working in a functional organization as a line supervisor. Your job is to inspect products, fill out the checklist, write your observations, and hand the product over to your boss before the end of the day. Your boss reviews it and comes with you to inspect the product himself and then approves the product. What kind of boss is he?
You have been appointed a project manager for a project which involves more than 3,000 stakeholders. After identifying your project stakeholders, you are in the process of determining the method to use for transferring information to your stakeholders. Which of the following factors will not affect your choice of technology?
In your project you identified a risk; there is a chance you may lose a critical employee. You have identified an employee from another project to bring into your project if your team member leaves you. However, this employee is known for his bad behavior and creating trouble for other employees. In a monthly risk review, a stakeholder asks you what your strategy will be if this new team member creates a problem for you. You assured him that you are aware of it and you also have a plan for it. What kind of risk is the stakeholder discussing with you?
You have signed a contract to construct a cross-country gas pipeline. The duration of the project is 5 years. Although the scope is well defined and the duration is long, the seller is insisting you reimburse any costs which may increase due to the time factor. What kind of contract will you select in this case?
You have been given a big project to complete. This is an important project for your company, therefore management does not want any delay in completion. As soon as the project charter is signed, you start identifying and categorizing stakeholders using various data representation tools. Which of the following tools will you not use here?
You are driving to a meeting and you are late. If you drive over the speed limit and run a few signals, you can reach the meeting on time as nobody is there to watch or catch you. Which of the following should you do?
A project manager has some authority to manage the budget; however, he does not have any full-time employees under him. In what type of organization is he working?
You have completed your project to construct a railway bridge. The project is in the closing phase and you are now archiving various documents such as the stakeholder register, risk register, project calendar, etc. All these documents are part of:
The client has given you a project to build a research center for him. You have met with all stakeholders, noted down their requirements, and you are now deciding which requirements should be included in the project and which should not. What process is this?
You are constructing a school building and due to some unforeseen incidents, your project is delayed. To bring the project on schedule, you are thinking about running several activities in parallel which were earlier planned to run sequentially. So, you started reviewing activities such as excavation of foundation, building walls, carpentry work, electrical work, and plumbing work, etc. After the review, you decide to run the carpentry, electrical, and plumbing works together. Excavating the foundation for the construction of a wall is an example of which of the following?
Assuming your past performance will be the same as the future performance, you have calculated the EAC as 250,000 USD. Your previous budget was 200,000 USD and you have earned 50,000 USD to date. What is the money spent to date?
Which of the following control charts will you use to monitor discrete data for a product to be considered a pass or fail?
Your project consists of 150 team members and most of them are from the local area. One day you hear that two team members are fighting with each other because of a parking place. You call both team members, listen to them, and decide that whoever arrives first will park their vehicle in that space. Both members agree and the issue is resolved. In a project, which one of the following is the least source of conflict?
Your team has 10 members, including you. Two new members are added to it. How many have the lines of communication increased?
During the project execution, some equipment breaks down. This risk was not identified earlier. So, to manage the situation you contacted several equipment holding companies and rented new equipment until your equipment is repaired. This is an example of:
During a project management process, you are reviewing proposals from many bidders using some predetermined criteria. Based on this review, you prepare a final list of bidders and then select a bidder from this list. What project management process is this?
You have recently joined an ongoing project and you just had a meeting with the project sponsor and other important members. Since you are new to the project, how will you know their views about the project?
You're working in a third world country with a high level of political volatility. Your team member told you that you will have to pay some bribes to get faster approval. What will your next step be?
You are managing four projects in your organization. Two projects are of a similar type, but the other two are entirely different. What is your role in the organization?
You have been assigned as a project manager for a project which was terminated a few years earlier due to some government regulations. Now you reviewing this document to start again. This document is an example of:
To collect the requirements for your project you have decided to use a few techniques including group creativity techniques. Which of the following is not an example of group creativity techniques?
Which of the following helps you to use existing knowledge and contribute to organizational learning?
You have been given a multi-year project to build a refinery. This is a very large and complex project, and you now need to estimate the cost for this project. What basic assumption will you need to make while estimating the cost for this project?
To reduce the cost of inventory, you are using a very famous Japanese methodology which emphasizes reducing the cost of inventory to a minimum level. In this methodology, how much inventory are you allowed to keep in stock?
Maslow's Hierarchy of Needs is represented in a hierarchical pyramid with five levels. The four lower levels are considered physiological needs, and the top level is considered growth needs. The lower level needs must be satisfied before higher-order needs can influence behavior. Which of the following represents the third level in Maslow's Hierarchical pyramid?
You prepared a Minutes of Meeting, got it signed by your boss, and sent it to all attendees. This communication is an example of which of the following?
You had contracted a Fixed Price Incentive Fee contract with the seller with the following parameters: Target cost: 500,000 USD Target profit: 50,000 USD Target price: 550,000 USD Ceiling price: 600,000 USD Share ratio: 80/20 The contractor has completed the work for 400,000 USD. How much actual profit will you give to the seller?
Project success is all about managing stakeholders efficiently and fulfilling their requirements. To keep them satisfied you will have to compare the current engagement level of all stakeholders with the planned stakeholder engagement throughout the project life cycle. As per the PMBOK Guide Sixth Edition, which option is not an engagement level of stakeholder classification?
"We report unethical or illegal conduct to appropriate management and, if necessary, to those affected by the conduct." The above statement belongs to:
The client has requested a change in a deliverable which you have processed through a change request and it is approved. Now, you are in the process of implementing this change into the project. In which of the following processes do you implement the approved change?
You are reviewing an old project file where you find a document which contains the project description, important requirements, milestones, and project budget. What document is it?
While finalizing the WBS you assign each work package to a control account and establish a unique identifier for the same work from a code of account. These identifiers help you find a hierarchical sum of costs, schedule, etc. Which statement is true about the WBS?
You have two activities with Finish to Start sequences. The duration of the first activity is 10 days, and the duration of the second activity is 8 days. The estimated time completed for these activities is 18 days. The client asks you complete these activities within 15 days; you review his request and agree to do so at no extra cost. Now, you plan to start the second activity three days before the first activity completes so that both activities can be completed in 15 days. This process is known as:
You are managing a multi-year project whose budget is 500,000 USD. The cost variance is -45,000 USD, the actual cost is 200,000 USD, and the planned value is 140,000 USD. Based on the above data which statement is correct?
The plan-do-check-act cycle is defined and modified by Shewhart & Deming. It is a four-step model for carrying out change and improving processes. In these four stages, which stage involves the evaluation of improvement?
During the team member acquiring process, you observe that a particular employee from another department can be used for your project for some work. Therefore, you ask their functional manager to provide the employee on alternate days. The functional manager says they can provide you with the particular employee for only two days a week. Which technique are you using here?
You are discussing an issue with your team member. While you are talking, he is rubbing his nose, looking around, and slouching. What kind of communication is he showing by using these activities?
During the risk analysis process, you find that a specific risk has a remote chance of happening and if it occurs, it will have very little effect on the project objective. What will you do with this risk?
In your project, you are going to use a large generator. The rental cost for this generator is 250 USD per day which is quite high. Since the rental cost is high, and you are going to use it for a long duration, your team members suggest that you should buy this generator for 50,000 USD. What is the minimum number of rental days before it becomes beneficial to buy the generator?
In your project, two important stakeholders are having some issues. To keep this issue from escalating further you intervene and resolve the issue. After the issue is resolved you asked your team member to record the issue so in the future a lesson can be learned from it. Where will you note the issues between stakeholders?
Which chapter of PMI Code of Ethics and Professional Conduct says: "We are truthful in our communications and in our conduct."
The cost performance baseline is a time phased funding of your project and you measure, monitor, and compare your project performance against it. In which of the following forms do you usually represent it?
A state government has passed the resolution that every motorbike driver and passenger has to wear a helmet. Your company sees an opportunity in this and gives you the project to build the facility to manufacture the helmets. Who is the user of this project?
While working on a deliverable which is 95% complete, two stakeholders come and enquire about it. They argue with you that this deliverable was not part of the project and it was not requested by any stakeholders, which you disagree with. Therefore, to prove your point, which document will you show them?
You have been given a task to install grass. The area of the lawn is 30 square meters, and it will take 5 more days for the supplier to deliver the required quantity of grass. At your best performance, you usually take 10 days to complete the task and in the worst case, it might take 22 days. However, most of the time you take around 15 days to complete the task, assuming no unfavorable events happen. What is the standard deviation for this activity?
In any project there are numerous types of cost expenditures involved. Out these costs, which cost is more difficult to manage for a project manager?
Your company has been acquired by a new organization. The new management is very particular about quality and they are not happy about the current quality of your organization's products. So, to improve the quality of the process and product, they have employed a philosophy to continuously improve all processes and products. This philosophy is known as:
You are a PMP and you have managed numerous projects. You have sound knowledge of project management tools & techniques and your team members respect your knowledge and experience. Which of the following powers do you possess?
You were working on a project to develop a high-end product. The budget of the project was huge and you were able to complete it on time and within the approved budget. Now, your project is closed and the deliverable is accepted by the client. What will the next recommended step be for you?
After identifying the risks, you analyze them qualitatively and quantitatively to see if your risk response planning will effectively minimize the project risk or not. If not, you will tweak your risk response plan so the project risks fall within the stakeholders' tolerance limits. Which of the following statements is correct about the quantitative risk analysis process?
You have been appointed a project manager for ABC Inc. and are given a project. While in the planning stage, you find that your organization is lacking the skills and manpower to complete a part of the work and the scope is also unclear. You decide to contract this work to a third party. What kind of contract will you select in this case?
You are currently in a process whose main benefit is to increase support and minimize resistance from stakeholders as the project evolves and environment changes. Which is not a tool and technique of this process?
The client asks you to inflate the budget by at least 10% because there is a chance that his management will reduce it by 10%. What will your response be in this situation?
You have a few important stakeholders who are not comfortable with each other, and you require their input on some issues to reach a consensus. Which of the following tools will you use in the current scenario?
You join a new company and have been assigned a new project. What will your first step be before starting to develop the project management plan?
While collecting work performance data, one of your team members has a misunderstanding about the description of work of several activities, their cost estimates, and the resources required by them. She comes to you and explains the situation. To answer her questions, what document will you ask her to refer to?
You have been given a project to construct a bridge. You have done the planning and the network diagram is drawn with following paths: First Path: Start -> A -> B -> C-> End, duration: 31 months. Second Path: Start ->D -> E ->F -> K->End, duration: 31 months. Third Path: Start -> D -> B -> C -> End, duration: 26 months. Fourth Path: Start -> G ->H ->I ->L-> End, duration: 31 months. Fifth Path: Start -> G -> E ->F -> End, duration: 16 months With the following information on hand, you can conclude that:
You have just been given a project and management wants to know the lump-sum cost of the project. Therefore, you give them the rough order magnitude estimate. What is the range of the rough order magnitude estimate at the Initiation phase of the project?
Which of the following tools helps you to determine whether the subcontractor's work is meeting the quality requirements?
You have noticed that some of your team members are not attending meetings, a few are always late and are frequently disruptive. Therefore, to remove these issues you set guidelines and establish clear expectations regarding acceptable behavior by project team members. Who will be responsible for implementing these rules?
Rob and Matt are two important and influential stakeholders of your project and they are having a conflict. As they are influential, the conflict between them can jeopardize the success of your project. Therefore, you decide to step in and ask them to meet with you in private. They come and discuss the conflict and finally the issue is resolved. What kind of communication is this?
You are working on a medium-sized project and management has decided to forego the perform quantitative risk analysis process. So, after identifying risks, you start the qualitative risk analysis process and now you are going to prioritize them. Which of the following techniques are you going to use?
You are analyzing a particular task with your team members to determine if the task should be done by your team, or if it should be contracted out to a contractor. Which process is this?
You are in the process of communicating and working with stakeholders to meet their needs and expectations and address issues as they occur. Which option is a tool and technique of this process?
You notice that one of your colleagues has not come to work for two days, and he did not inform anyone about it. Upon enquiring, he told you that he will cover it by working overtime. What should you do?
You are working in an organization where the work group arrangement is flexible, team members work side by side, and you have little authority. What type of organizational structure is this?
As per the PMBOK Guide, the project life cycle is a series of phases that a project passes through from its initiation to its closure, and these phases are generally sequential. Which of the following is not a project life cycle phase?
During the collect requirements process, an influential stakeholder requested a feature which was rejected. During the project execution, you notice that you have an opportunity to incorporate the requirement of this stakeholder into the product and it will cost you nothing. By doing so, the stakeholder will be pleased and may help you in your next assignment. This is an example of:
You are working in a project to analyze the impact of pollution on human life, and you have drawn a network diagram for this project. Which type of relationship have you used in this network diagram?
Due to some issues, your project is behind schedule and over budget, therefore management is very concerned about the future of your project. To show the exact picture of your project you calculate the TCPI, and you go to management. What does this TCPI show the management?
During the control quality process, you are reviewing a chart which has some lines above and below the x-axis and a cyclic line between them. What is the purpose of this chart?
Jackson was a very good programmer on your team and your company is very pleased with his performance. Therefore, the top management promoted him to a manager of another department. However, in his new role, his performance is below average. This effect is known as:
You have joined AVC Corp and are immediately assigned a project. The project charter is signed, stakeholders have been identified and now you are classifying them according to the direction of influence. Which of the following is not a way to classify the project stakeholders under this technique?
During a meeting, you notice that some members are dominating other members, and a few members are keeping silent. Which tool ensures a fair contribution from all members and removes dominance?
You have received many bids from contractors and are now separating them according to their experience, technical expertise, and capabilities. After segregating these responses, you are reviewing them to see if they are capable of doing the job or not. What process is this?
You suspect that a PMP credential holder has given false information to PMI while applying for the exam. What should you do?
In your organization, all PCs are outdated and you have to order new ones, including an operating system and office suite. You contacted one supplier and he told you that he can provide you with PCs for 1,000 USD including everything. You agree and are now ready to procure 500 PCs. What type of contract will you select here?
You receive an urgent change request from the client. You review the request and find that it might cost a lot if you implement this change request. What will be your next step?
You gave the responsibility of collecting requirements from project stakeholders to four of your team members. After starting the requirements collection process one of your team members left the job and the requirements could not be compiled properly. Initially, you did not notice this, however, during a product review, a few stakeholders told you that some of the features in the products were not requested by them. Therefore, to verify their comments you review the product requirements and identify the issue. This is an example of:
You have been given a research project to develop a new medication to treat an infection. You are in the process of calculating the duration of the project. As this is a unique project and the calculation of activity duration is not easy, you ask experts to come up with several possible duration estimates for each activity so you can find the average duration. In this scenario, which technique will you use?
You are working in a big organization which manages many projects simultaneously. They have provided you with a separate floor in their building for administrative activities. As you are using the company's space, they regularly send you an electricity bill to pay. The cost of electricity used by your office is an example of which of the following?
You are observing a chart which has a line drawn between the X and Y axis. The Xaxis shows the time and Y-axis shows the data points. What kind of information can you find here?
Your project team is located in different locations. Your schedule is delayed and you're facing many issues. Which of the following is the best solution to this problem?
You publish some informative notes on the company's web portal and ask stakeholders to review it. What kind of communication method is this?
You have developed a risk response plan which says if the trigger occurs, the risk response owner asks the risk action owner to implement the plan and update him with the result. What is the trigger condition in risk management?
You are reviewing seller-prepared documents and quality audits are conducted during the seller's execution of the work with an objective to identify performance success and failure. What process is this?
John is a stakeholder of your project and is known for creating problems. During the project execution, you noticed that he started creating problems with your project and you are afraid that if this issue is not solved, it will affect your project. So, to avoid this situation, which of the following should you do?
Alice is a new team member in your project and she does not have much experience. As the project is big and involves many governmental departments, you ask Alice to pay more attention to some standards and regulations. Which of the following statements is true about the standards and regulations?
Your project has successfully completed; the deliverable is handed over to the client, and you are in the close phase or project process. Which of the following activities will you not perform in the close phase or project process?
You are sitting in a group discussion with 13 stakeholders and collecting ideas. Now you are in the final stage and are selecting the final idea. As there are many ideas, you decide to vote. After voting you see that a particular idea receives 7 votes, so you go with that option. What kind of decision making is this?
You have been given a task to estimate a budget for your project. You are using a bottom up cost estimation technique to calculate the cost of each activity. Management told you that the management reserve will be 6% of the cost baseline. Which of the following represents the budgeted cost of the project?
Due to an unknown process error, you have been facing problems and the project is being delayed. To solve the problem, you call for a meeting with experts and discuss the issue. After the meeting, you discover the error and start working on resolving the issue. Where will you go to solve the problem?
You have a team of 10 members. They started to work together and are learning to trust each other. In which stage are they working?
You are having a session with five team members. During the session, you notice that one team member is reading messages, the second team member is talking with another team member, the fourth team member is looking at the slides, and the fifth is making eye contact with you. Which of the following team members is showing sign of active listening?
During the project execution you run a program for some parameters and draw a bell curve as shown in the figure below. After analyzing this figure, you come to the conclusion that:
You are a project manager of a complex project which involves many procurement contracts with subcontractors. During the execution phase, a subcontractor comes to you and says that he has completed his part of the work. You reviewed the facts and provided the subcontractor with a formal written notice that the contract has ended. What process is this?
Due to an error in the process, a defect is occurring in a deliverable. You identified the root cause of the problem and made some changes to the process to stop the defect from occurring. This process is known as:
You are working in a large organization and managing a project to construct a road. To help you in your project, your PMO is providing you with their support and require you to comply with them. What kind of PMO is this?
During the planning phase, you have created the WBS for the work that you are about to complete. However, because of a lack of information you are not able to create the WBS for the rest of the work, so you leave it until you get the correct and detailed information. This is an example of:
During the project execution, a stakeholder comes to you and argues against a particular deliverable. You investigated it and found that this particular deliverable was based on his requirement. To prove this, what document will you show to him?
You calculated the cost of constructing the walls by multiplying the cost per square foot with the total area of the wall. This is an example of which of the following?
A team of experts come to your project and ask for approved procedures to verify your team is following these procedures. This is an example of which of the following?
You are working on a project to build a canal for irrigation purposes. Six months have passed, and now the team is working as a well-organized unit. Team members are interdependent, working smoothly, and working effectively. What team formation stage is this?
You are in a conference room meeting with bidders and answering their queries. Some bidders brought their laptops and are busy with them, many of them are busy with asking you questions. There is also a cleaner who is vacuuming the floor outside your conference room. Which of the following is an example of noise?
You have identified a risk that at a certain point in your project you may need extra quantities of a consumable which you thought of earlier. The chance of this event occurring is 20% and if it occurs it will cost you 150 USD. So, you develop a contingency plan for this risk and assign a risk owner. What kind of risk response strategy is this?
Your project is behind schedule and over budget, and the actual cost is on its way to being higher than the target cost. You and the client both are worried about the project's progress and there is a high probability that the point of total assumption will be crossed. Which of the following assumptions is true about the point of total assumption?
You are over budget and it is impossible to complete the project with the given budget. Therefore, you raise the change request which management approves. After the change request is approved, you update the cost baseline and update other project documents. The document used to register any changes which occur during the project execution is known as:
In the create WBS process, you sub-divide project deliverables and project work into smaller and more manageable components. The output of this process is the scope baseline and project document update. Which of the following truly represents the scope baseline?
You have one document which hierarchically categorizes labor, equipment, and materials, etc. This document is known as:
You are in the process of aggregating the estimated costs of individual activities or work packages to establish an authorized cost baseline. What process is this?
You are having many issues on your project and progress is not good. Because of the large number of issues, you decide to solve those issues that have the highest numbers of occurrences and impact on your project. Which tool will you use in this situation?
Julia is a longtime employee of your organization and is given to you for your new project. She was very good in her previous position but you notice that she is not performing well with the assignment you have given her. After further investigation, you learn that she is lacking skills to complete the job assigned to her. What will your next step be?
You are working with a big organization which follows a matrix structure. As the organization is big, the communication channels are complex and cross functional. You occasionally communicate with your equivalents in other departments as well. You have several team members working under you who report to you. After getting their response you also report to your boss. What kind of communication is this?
If you finish your project early, there is a chance that you may get another project, so you are trying very hard to get your project finished. You use fast tracking, crashing, overtime, etc. Which strategy is this?
You have signed a contract with a contractor which states that you will pay for the entire contractor's legitimate costs, plus a fee based on the subjective evaluation of his performance; this will not be subject to an appeal. What kind of contract is this?
You are working on a project which is under budget and ahead of schedule. The project is 85% complete, and the client comes and asks you to terminate the project because he fears a possible regulation can impact his project. You review the project parameters and find that you can complete the project before the proposed legislation comes into existence; moreover, you won't need any extra funding. What will your next steps be?
A document provides detailed deliverables, activities, and scheduling information about components. Other information includes the code of account identifier, assumptions and constraints, schedule milestones, resources required, and acceptance criteria. This document can possibly be:
You are in the process of establishing the policies, procedures, and documentation for planning, developing, managing, executing, and controlling the project schedule. Which of the following is not a tool and technique of this process?
Your project has a cost overrun and a new budget has been approved. Which formula will you use to calculate the TCPI?
Cost of quality includes all costs incurred over the lifetime of the product by investing in the prevention of nonconformance to requirements, appraising the product or service for conformance to requirements, and failing to meet requirements. Which is not an example of the cost of non-conformance?
Two team members come to you with a dispute. Since you are very busy, you briefly listen to one member, agree with him, and support his view. What kind of problemsolving technique is this?
You are working on a big project and team members are located in different geographic locations. Your team has encountered some issues while communicating. During phone calls, some voices get lost and members also face difficulties in understanding the problems. So, you decide to find a better communication method to discuss issues. Which of the following is the most effective communication method?
Risk tolerance is the degree, amount, or volume of risk that an organization or individual will withstand. It helps the project manager to:
The client asks you for some minor changes to the project and you discuss this matter with your team members. One of your team members told you that he thinks that it will not affect any other project objective. What will you do now?
You are busy with an important milestone, and after that, you have to deliver a deliverable to the client. Since the client is known for his difficult behavior, management is worried whether the client will accept the deliverable. Therefore, they tell you to check the product acceptance criteria again before calling the client. What document will you look at to get this information?
Based on the table shown below identify the Critical Path (draw the network diagram considering day 1 as the first day of the project. Answers to questions are based on the diagram considering day 1 as the first day of the project).
What is the duration of path ABFG?
What is the Early Start (ES) of activity F?
What is the Late Finish (LF) of activity E?
You are in the process of defining policies, procedures, and guidance to help you manage the project costs. In which process you are working?
You have joined a company which is producing IC chips for mobile phones. The quality is imperative for the product and so the company is following the Six Sigma methodology for its operations. In this methodology, what percentage of defective product is allowed?
Your project is very complex and due to a scope change, you need a few additional experts, which you did not think of earlier. You request that your company provide you with some experts for consultancy work. Although your company has provided you with those experts, they are located in a different geographical location. In this situation, how will you get their input?
You call your team member and give some instructions. She receives your message and gives her feedback. What is the role of the team member in this conversion?
Suddenly, during the project execution, a generator breaks down, and you don't have any other generators available. You review your risk management plan to see if you have any responses to this situation. Unfortunately, you do not find anything relating to generator failures. Therefore, you call your friend who is, incidentally, an equipment supplier to provide you with the generator at a reasonable rate. This is an example of:
You are working on a project to build a production line to produce round balls. During the inspection, you observe that some of these balls are not round. You analyze the problem and find that it can be prevented by making some changes to the procedures. Therefore, you make changes to the procedure to prevent this problem again. This is an example of:
The scope baseline provides a detailed description of project deliverables and their components that provide a basis for the measurement of changes from that baseline. In which process is the scope baseline developed?
During the quality control process, you are reviewing a chart which has many limits such as upper control limit, lower control limit, upper specification limit, and lower specification limit. While observing chart, you notice that a parameter of a specimen is outside of specification limits, so you ask a team member to replace the specimen. How are the upper and lower control limits defined?
You are developing a quality management plan for your project. During the planning process, one of your team members tells you that, in the past, the organization has completed a similar project. You start to review the old project and find that some of its quality metrics can be used in your project as well. This technique is known as:
According to Maslow's Hierarchy of Needs, once your need on a particular level is filled, you look for the next level requirement. Now your physiological and safety needs have been met. What will your next requirement be?
You receive an email in French. Since you're unable to read French, you bring in a translator to translate the message into English. What is the translator doing here?
You are making some changes to the scope and schedule baseline because you have identified a high-impact risk and management does not want to take a risk. What process is this?
Because of the huge size of your project, you have divided it into several phases. After completing each phase, you hand it over to the client and then move on to the next phase. Which process ensures that the previous phase has met all of its requirements so you can move on to the next phase?
You are managing a project with a budget of 500,000 USD, and 250,000 USD has been spent. Upon review, you observe that only 40% of the work has been completed. Your schedule says that you should have completed 50% of the work. What is the schedule performance index (SPI)?
You are managing a project with a budget of 500,000 USD, and 250,000 USD has been spent. Upon review, you observe that only 40% of the work has been completed. Your schedule says that you should have completed 50% of the work. What is estimate at completion (EAC)?
You are managing a project with a budget of 500,000 USD, and 250,000 USD has been spent. Upon review, you observe that only 40% of the work has been completed, your schedule says that you should have completed 50% of the work. What will be estimate to complete (ETC)?
You and your management are inspecting project deliverables with the client and are determining if this is as per the stated requirements or not. Which of the following statement is true about the above process?
According to Herzberg, hygiene factors are not enough to motivate employees. To motivate employees, you need other factors, which are called satisfiers. According to Herzberg, which of the following is a satisfier?
An issue has arisen which forces you to schedule a meeting with your stakeholders. A project team member tells you that one of your influential stakeholders may not come to the meeting because of a personal issue. You choose not to take any action because you think that you will manage without the presence of this stakeholder. What kind of risk response strategy are you using here?
You have estimated the cost of your project by calculating the cost of each activity, adding them together to get the cost of a work package, and then you adding together the cost of all work packages. What kind of estimate are you using here?
You were recently appointed as a project manager in an organization. You are well recognized in the organization because of your connection with management, and team members obey you because of this relationship. What kind of power do you possess here?
You are sitting with your team members and experts in a room and defining the definition of probability of events occurring and the impact. What process is this?
The cost which changes according to the scope and the scale of the project is known as:
You are planning to implement a change in your project. There is a 75% chance that it will help your organization to save 100,000 USD. However, there is a 25% chance of losing 50,000 USD. Calculate the expected monitory value (EMV).
You are comparing the actual vs planned practice to those of comparable organizations to identify best practices and provide a basis for measuring performance. What tool are you using here?
Based on the below figure, calculate the Expected Monitory Value (EMV) of Choice A.
Calculate which choice is a better choice.
You are reviewing a plan which explains how changes to the product will be initiated, how impacts will be analyzed, and how they will be traced, tracked, and reported, as well as the authorization levels required to approve these changes. What document is this?
Two team members come to you with a dispute regarding their roles and responsibilities. To resolve the dispute, which document will you refer to?
In a SWOT analysis, when you are able to convert threats into opportunities and weaknesses into strengths, it is known as:
Your project is running late and you are over budget. You review the situation and find that it would be difficult for you to complete the project with the given budget. You inform management and they ask you to come up with a new budget. After estimating the new cost, you inform management that you may need 10,000 USD more to complete the project. This is an example of:
Your project is spread over a large geographical area so your team is also spread throughout the globe. During a recent virtual meeting, you noticed that there is a communication gap among some team members. What will you do to improve communication?
You are in the planning phase of a project and you find that, due to a miscommunication, some additional features were added to the product which were not requested by any of your stakeholders. Which of the following could help you avoid such a situation?
You have joined an ongoing project which is on schedule, but over budget, and the cost performance index is 0.55. There was something wrong with the project cost estimate. Therefore, you started reviewing the project management plan and found that the previous manager used a very old project's statistical data and applied it to the current project to come up with the project budget. What will you do to correct the error?
Which of the following theories is based on trust and emphasizes involving workers with the management?
During the risk identification process, your team identifies an event for which you are not able to find the probability and its impact. This event is known as:
You have joined an ongoing project. This project is in trouble, so you identify the issues which have the highest effect on the project, and now you are analyzing the reason for these issues. Which tool are you using now?
You are in a process whose objective is outlining and guiding team selection and responsibility assignment to obtain a successful team. Which of the following is an output of this process?
You arrive at a site to inspect a deliverable. Suddenly a team member comes to you and he is sweating and exhausted. He shouts at you and tells you that some equipment has failed and it urgently needs to be replaced, otherwise other activities may be impacted severely. Which of the following describes the pitch and tone of the voice?
You are in a process which helps you evaluate the effectiveness of the risk process throughout the project. Which of the following documents will not be updated here?
During the status review with your stakeholders, one of the stakeholders told you that they were not asked for their opinion, and now they need a change in the product characteristics. This change may lead to a change in your cost and schedule baseline. Which of the following processes could have helped you prevent this issue?
Based on the above Tornado Diagram, you can tell management that:
Due to the lack of available expertise in your area, you have hired many team members from diverse geographical areas and cultures. Therefore, they are having problems with technical terms used by other team members. Sometimes they agree on the definition of a term and other times they do not. What will you do to solve the issue?
The create WBS process is where you create the work breakdown structure. The WBS helps you immensely in developing the schedule and other project management activities. Which of the following is the highest element in the hierarchical breakdown of the work breakdown structure?
If you want to complete your project on schedule and with minimal obstruction, you must pay close attention to the critical path. The duration of the critical path is the shortest duration in which you can complete the project. Which of the following statements is not true about the critical path?
You have been assigned as project manager for a project. You are in the planning phase when management asks you to provide them with all activities showing logical relationships. You draw the network diagram and use dummy activities to make logical relationships more clear. Which of the following network diagramming techniques are you using here?
You are reviewing the lessons learned from previous projects and you notice a process error that might cause a defect in the project deliverable. You review your project's process and make sure that this error does not occur with your project deliverable. This is an example of:
During the project execution, due to excessive hot weather some of your equipment has started showing signs of malfunctioning. This problem was brought to you by a team member so you decided to deal with it. Which of the following is not a methodological step to solve the problem?
You are managing a large project with many contractors working on it. A stakeholder comes to you and informs you that he never received the status report from one of your contractors. What will your next step be?
You are in the identifying risks process. You are meeting with your team members and stated that the project may be delayed because of the late delivery of certain consumables for your project. Now you ask the team members to find ways in which this problem can occur. What technique are you using here?
You have floated a tender for your project, and to clarify some issues raised by bidders you are conducting a bidder conference. What will not be done in a bidder conference?
You are gathering all the information about the stakeholders and discussing with your team members what changes they can make to the project objective. Which technique are you using here?
Which chapter of the PMI Code of Ethics says that "We negotiate in good faith"?
While reviewing the project parameters a team member tells you that due to an incorrect activity duration estimate, the current schedule is no longer valid and you must update the schedule baseline. You listen to him and analyze the issue. You agree with him and ask him to start the process for a change request. Which of the following statements is true about change management?
You are in the process of dividing work into smaller components so you can get a structured vision of what has to be delivered. What process is this?
In your project, you have two activities, D and E. These two activities have a common successor, Activity F. Activity D will be completed on the 10th and activity E will be completed on the 15th. Therefore, Activity D can be delayed by 5 days without affecting the early start of Activity F. This delay is known as:
You are estimating the cost for your project by using historical data and applying it to your project, such as the cost of painting per square foot. Which technique are you using here?
You have set the control limits for your control chart as 5-30, and the mean is at 16. While reviewing the chart, you see that some consecutive points are: 6, 8, 5, 11, 14, 12, 13, 9. What does this mean?
You are planning resources for your project and the team charter has been established. This charter provides a clear guideline of the acceptable behavior of team members. Which of the following is not included?
You realize that you have made an error in your monthly status meeting. Therefore, you send stakeholders the correct report by email. What kind of communication method are you using here?
You are working in a big organization. Due to a change in market conditions your organization needs to raise a small project to accommodate the current change in the organization's processes. The initiating phase is complete and now you are in the planning phase and developing the project plan. Which of the following project management processes can be omitted for this project?
You are constructing a big mall for a client. During the execution phase, the client requests additional work and you agree. The scope of work is clear but you are lacking expertise and time, so you decide to procure this part of the work. What kind of contract will you select considering you can review invoices submitted by a contractor?
A stakeholder register contains all the information about the stakeholders. Which of the following is not included in the stakeholder register?
Which chapter of the PMI Code of Ethics talks about disclosing a conflict of interest?
Your organization has received two projects. One project is to design a call center for the client, and the other is research work in pollution control. How are you going to manage these two projects?
You have a large, multi-year project. Because of the large scope and duration, you decide that you will plan near term work in detail, and for the rest, you will make a high-level plan. Once you move ahead you will plan, in detail, for that work. This is an example of:
Your project is delayed and you have another project to start as soon as possible. You are also having a problem with resource allocating, so you started reviewing activities to find which activities can be started late and which cannot. On a network diagram, what kind of activities can have the maximum flexibility without causing more delay?
The authorized time phased budget which you use to monitor and control the cost of the project is known as:
You join an organization where you notice that a lot of inventory is lying idle and wasted, because as some inventory is underutilized or it is expired. Therefore, you suggest that your management follow a methodology which focuses on keeping less inventory and the reduction in wastage to improve production and performance. What methodology is this?
Michael and John are having some conflicts and they come to you. Since you are too busy and the problem is complex, you go with the midway of both parties and partially satisfy both of them. What conflict resolution technique are you using here?
Interpersonal skills are important for a project manager as they help him or her to manage stakeholders properly. Which of the following is not an interpersonal skill?
You are developing the project management plan. Management asks you to provide them with information on the chances of completing the project under different circumstances. The project is important and so management does not want to delay the schedule. You compile the data and use a tool and tell management that there is a 90% chance you can complete the project within the schedule, however, if you are given three weeks of extra time, the chance of completing project rises to 98%. Which of the following statements is true about the tool you have used to come up with this information?
Your company is managing a large project and they are finding it difficult and risky to do on their own, so they want to outsource some tasks to a third party. What kind of contract will have a minimal risk for your company?
Mike is an important stakeholder in your project. You have worked with him in a previous project and know that he frequently changes his requirements and creates trouble if those requirements are not met. How will you manage him?
You are a part of a tendering committee and are going to review the tenders from a few contractors. While reviewing the tenders, you noticed that one contractor is your wife's distant cousin. What will your next step be?
You open a new hotel in Malaysia. You are new to this area and do not have experience in catering services. You are discussing whether you should provide your own catering service for your customers or to outsource it from another caterer who is experienced. They are guaranteeing their service and ready to accept a fine if they fail to serve your customers in a timely manner. Since their offer is lucrative, you decline starting your own catering service for customers and accept their offer. What kind of risk response strategy is this?
You are collecting requirements for your project. For a few requirements you are having difficulty reaching a consensus, so you decide to vote and select the choice which has the largest number of votes. What voting technique is this?
In which network diagrammatic technique do you assume that the resources will always be available whenever they are needed?
Which of the following gives you the cost estimate of your project if you continue to perform with the same cost performance?
You are asked to produce a 10-meter long tube, and you are producing tubes within the range of 12.1 m, 11.98 m, 12.12 m, 12.08, etc. This means that:
Two very important stakeholders are having a conflict which may affect your project. They come to you but you are very busy. In this case what kind of conflict resolution technique should you select?
You call your team member on his cell phone and ask for the current status of the project. What kind of communication is this?
During the execution phase, some equipment fails; the risk owner implements the contingency plan and brings in new equipment immediately from an identified supplier. This is an example of:
You have made John responsible for painting a certain portion of the building you are constructing. John completes the painting and submits his bills to you. You review his invoices, pay him and close the contract. What process is this?
You have been given a project to clean an area where hundreds of families are living and to develop residential flats for them. Since there so many stakeholders involved, how will you manage them?
During the cost review, you noticed that, due to a mistake, you over calculated the cost of a work package that led to an increase in the cost of the project. No one noticed it and the budget is already approved. What will your next step be?
You have been hired as a consultant for a project that is in trouble. You meet the project manager and ask several questions regarding the project budget, the project end date, etc. The project manager was not able to answer some of these questions properly, so you decided to verify them yourself. What document will you refer to in order to verify such facts?
Your client comes to you during the project execution. He tells you about a minor requirement that he forgot during the collect requirement process. He assures you that there will be no effect on the cost if you implement his request. What will your next step be?
For your project, you have broken down the work package into activities and just now completed the network diagram. Which process is this?
Your project is ahead of schedule but over budget. Therefore, you ask your team member to collect data and compare it with the cost baseline. Which of the following is not included in the cost baseline?
Your company is having problems delivering the finished product from the factory to the warehouses, which are located in different geographical areas. To smooth out the process, you have identified all critical stages for this procedure. What will be your next step?
In which of the following is the process where you define the objectives so that management and employees understand it and understand how to work together to achieve these objectives?
The communication model helps you communicate information to stakeholders smoothly. Which of the following is not a basic step in the communication model?
Which of the following helps the project team to look at many sources from which project risks may arise in a risk identification exercise?
You have signed a contract to have a customer care support system built for your company. In this contract, you have mentioned that you will pay all costs incurred plus a monetary benefit if you are happy with the work and the contractor fulfills some conditions set in the contract. What type of contract is this?
You have been assigned as project manager for a large project. This project has a very large numbers of stakeholders and you have to identify and analyze each of them. What is the best time to identify the project stakeholders?
You have been transferred to a country where it is a local custom to give a gift to guests when meeting for the first time. Therefore, during your first meeting they have offered you a gift. What will you do now?
You are managing a multi-year, multi-billion dollar, highly complex project. The project is very critical for your organization. Therefore, you need better control and management. How will you achieve these objectives?
The work breakdown structure provides you with a structured vision of what has to be delivered, and the WBS dictionary provides you with detailed deliverables, activities, and scheduling information about each component in the WBS. Which of the following information cannot be found in the WBS dictionary?
You are sequencing activities to develop the schedule using a precedence diagram method. To do this you need to identify the type of dependency between the activities. Which of the following is not a type of dependency used in a precedence diagram method?
You are managing a project whose budget is 150,000 USD. To date, you have spent 25% of your budget and have earned 28,000 USD of the project, though according to the schedule you should have earned 42,000 USD. What is the percentage of work completed?
During an inspection, you are reviewing a chart and notice that a particular process is outside the below specification limit. You instruct your team member to take corrective action. What chart have you reviewed here?
You have been given a project to develop some gaming software for the client. You have developed many similar games in the past and possess the knowledge and skills that are needed to build the game. You have recruited your team and many of them are new, however all of them respect you a lot. What kind of power are you showing here?
As per the PMBOK Guide, which of the following is not a communication method that you use to share information among project stakeholders?
The credibility of your risk management depends on the unbiased probability and impact of identified risks. If these parameters are not correctly assessed, your risk management is not worth following. In which of the following process do you define the definition of probability of risks?
You are constructing an office building for your client. You decide to outsource painting and electric work from a third party. You create a detailed work description and ask bidders to apply for this part of the project. The document you just prepared is known as:
A need arises to extend the office building to accommodate more employees. Your organization has all necessary capabilities to build it on your own. You have been assigned as project manager for this project, and you have immediately started identifying the project stakeholders. Which of the following is least useful in this process?
While browsing the internet you find a website offering real PMP exam questions to students. What will your next step be?
During the risk response process, you find a risk which would be difficult for you to manage. You discuss the issue with management and a decision is taken to transfer the management of this risk to your portfolio manager. What risk response strategy is this?
The project charter is a document which initiates the project, establishes your authority and contains some high-level information. Which of the following information will not be included in the project charter?
Crashing helps you bring the project back on schedule if it is late. Which of the following statements is true about crashing?
Your project is 10% complete when due to a sudden change in market conditions, management analyzes whether to proceed with the project or not. In one such discussion, a stakeholder says that you have already spent a lot of money so they will have to consider this point as well. However, you tell him that this cost is already incurred and should not affect future decisions. This cost is known as:
Your company wants to get ISO 9001 certified. Therefore, they call some experts from a lead consultancy to come and certify the company as ISO 9001. These experts come and review your documents and verify each and every detail. What process is this?
Jijo and Stefan are two employees of your organization. Jijo is working in an office and Stefan is on a site so their working conditions are different. During the project execution, both of them have some kind of conflict and come to you. You listen to them and solve the conflict. Which of the following is most likely to be a reason for a conflict in the working environment?
You are in the process of creating, collecting, distributing, storing, retrieving, and the ultimate disposition of project information in accordance with the communications management plan. What is the output of this process?
During risk planning, a team member comes to you and informs you about a risk. This risk was not important; therefore, you tell him to just note down the risk and you will manage this risk if it occurs. What risk response strategy you are using here?
Your company is a supplier of chemicals used by paint industry, and you see that a big painting manufacturer is requiring a chemical that you can provide them with at a lower cost. You try to get this contract but you are facing difficulties because you are not on their qualified seller list. What is the qualified seller list?
You have been assigned as project manager to conduct a study to find the impact of pollution on the environment. After the project charter is signed, you have completed the identify project stakeholders process and are now about to classify them. Which of the following models of classifying the project stakeholders is not mentioned in the PMBOK Guide 6th Edition?
Your company has terminated you for acts which you did not perform. After your termination, one of your old company's competitors contacts you and asks for some inside information in return for some financial favors. What will you do now?
You are working in an organization where you have a full-time role, authority over the budget, and a full-time project team. Which of the following statements is not true about this type of organization?
To demonstrate your product, you develop a small functional model of your real product and show to your stakeholders to get their feedback. This model is known as:
You have joined an ongoing project which is 25% completed. As the project is big, to understand its activities you started reviewing a network diagram. The network diagram is complex and contains many dummy activities. Which network diagram technique is used to draw this chart?
The budget of your project is 350,000 USD and you have spent 200,000 USD. However, upon analyzing the project's performance you find that you are over budget and may need 200,000 USD to complete the remaining work. This 200,000 USD is known as:
You draw a scatter diagram and all points are scattered and look like that they lie in a circle. What does this mean?
Your management is concerned about the performance of their employees. They feel that their employees are not motivated enough to perform better and that they lack enthusiasm. Therefore, they ask you come up with ways to motivate them. Which of the following can be a motivating factor?
During the project execution, a very influential stakeholder comes to you and asks for a change. He tells you that this change will not impact any baseline or project objectives. You agree with him and implement the change. What went wrong here?
You identified a risk in your project that is difficult for you to manage, therefore, you give the responsibility to manage this risk to an outside source. What kind of risk response strategy is this?
You are in the process of developing procurement contracts for your project for which the scope is not very clear. You know that you will be very busy with other activities and will not have the time to monitor contractor work and audit the payment details. In this case, what kind of contract will you select?
Identify stakeholders is a process where you identify stakeholders for your project. Which of the following statements is not true regarding this process?
You are working in a country where people are used to giving bribes to get work done faster. You also need some work done quickly so one of your team members told you to give a bribe to the official responsible for this job. What will you do now?
The client has given you a project to install a new kind of elevator, so you start designing it from scratch. The planning phase is completed and you are now about to install the elevator. Suddenly a team member comes to you and asks for a change in the quality management plan as he has identified a flaw in the process. In which process can you perform the integrated change control?
Which of the following statements is not correct regarding the best practice to be used for lessons learned?
Activity A has ES-5, EF-10 and Activity B has ES-7, and the duration is 4 days. What kind of relationship exists between these two activities?
Your project is 90% completed, the cost performance index is 1.2 and the schedule performance index is 0.8. Management is concerned about the delay and asks you to utilize schedule compression so the project can be completed on time. Which of the following statements is true about the schedule performance index?
During the review of a control chart, you observe that the limit for one deliverable is below the lower control limit but above the specification limit. What will your next step be?
During the project execution, a stakeholder comes to you and tells you that she suspects that some team members are not doing their tasks and are busy with other activities. You discuss her concerns with her and show her a document. After seeing it, she agrees with that the team members are doing the right job. What document was this?
During your project execution, some spare parts did not arrive and you need them urgently. This risk was not previously identified. What will your next step be?
You are discussing strategies to be used to manage and engage stakeholders in your project. Which process are you in?
Interpersonal skills are also known as soft skills, which are behavioral competencies that help you develop your project management team. Which of the following is not an interpersonal skill which is required to manage the project team?
Validate scope is the process which helps increase the chances that the client will accept the deliverable. Here, the client reviews the verified deliverable from the control quality process. Which of the following statements is true about validate scope process?
You are in the process of estimating the number of working days needed to complete activities. There are many techniques available to do this. Which of the following is not a technique that you will use for this purpose?
You have been supplying engines to an auto-production company. During inspection at the client's facility, a few of your engines failed testing. Therefore, they send you those engines for replacement. What kind of cost of quality is this?
You are using an analytic tool to find the strengths and weaknesses of alternatives to determine the best option in terms of benefits provided. What tool is this?
Some of your team members do not come to meetings on time. A few other members keep themselves busy with other activities during meetings, and their behavior is not proper. Therefore, to improve the environment what step will you take?
An identified risk occurred during the execution phase and the risk owner implemented the risk response plan. The impact of the risk was higher than the planned impact and the risk response plan was not effective. So, you ask the risk owner to implement the fallback plan to contain the situation. To implement the fallback plan, which reserve is most likely to be utilized?
You need to hire several subject matter experts for your project. Time is limited and the scope of work is also not very clear. In this situation what kind of procurement contract will you utilize to hire experts?
Your project is 60% complete and while reviewing the lessons learned document you notice that it has missed a few lessons you have learned recently. You call all your team members and tell them to update the lessons learned as they happen. On any project, who is responsible for updating the lessons learned?
Management wants to track the project cost and you want to provide them with this information with the use of a chart. Which of the following charts can be used for this purpose?
You are in the process of subdividing project deliverables and project work into smaller, more manageable parts so the project management team can get a structured vision of what has to be delivered. Which of the following is an output of this process?
An activity can be completed in 5 days if the conditions are favorable; however, if the conditions are unfavorable, it will take 10 days to complete. The most likely time for this activity to be completed is 6 days. Determine the PERT estimate for this activity.
What is the standard deviation for the above activity?
You are reviewing a chart which looks like an S-Curve during the execution phase of your project. What kind of chart is this?
A team member tells you that if he adds a few extra lines of code to the program, it will add some more functionality to the program and the client will appreciate the product. You ask him to refrain from doing so. What the team member was going to do is known as:
You are going to launch a new product in the market and to attract customers you sign an advertisement contract with a famous Hollywood actor. What kind of power are you using here to market your product?
The probability and impact matrix helps you rank risks so you can develop your risk management plan accordingly. Which statement is true about the probability and impact matrix?
You have signed a multi-year contract with a customer to complete a project for a fixed price. Since the duration of the contract is long, you have added a provision to adjust the price of the contract according to the market inflation. What kind of contract is this?
Your organization has an opportunity to select one project from many available projects. Therefore, they ask you to select a project based on the constrained optimization selection method. Which of the following techniques will you use to select the project?
Enterprise environmental factors are conditions under which you must work and you cannot control them. Which of the following is not an enterprise environmental factor?
Your organization gets a new project and wants you to assign the project manager for this project. As management is busy with other activities, they ask you to develop the project charter so the project can get started. To develop the project charter, which of the following is not needed?
The client has given you a project to construct a cold storage plant. Everything was going as planned, however, due to some unforeseen incidents, your project is delayed. The client is in a hurry and has threatened you with a large penalty if you are not able to complete the project on time. So, you started working hard to complete the project and avoid the fine. You are working overtime, bringing in more resources from other projects, and renting extra equipment; finally, you complete the project on time. This is an example of:
Due to an improper cost management plan, you are over budget and a new estimate is required to complete the project. Management asks you what the new estimate for the project will be. Which of the following formulas is not used to find this new estimate?
Management wants to get your organization accredited by ISO for its quality management system. Therefore, they call some external auditors to come and review your processes for ISO QMS compliance. Which ISO standard is used for a quality management system?
You are working in a large organization and directly reporting to the project manager. Whenever you give any report to the project manager, he asks for supporting evidence and documents. He also routinely watches all his team members' minute activities. What kind of boss is he?
You are behind schedule and the client has threatened you with a penalty if you fail to complete the project on time. Therefore, you fast-track many activities to finish the project earlier. Unfortunately, an important team member has become ill and left the job. You did not plan for this incident; however, you manage to get a replacement from a manpower supply company and the risk is mitigated, although you have to pay him more salary. From where will you deduct this extra amount?
The project statement of work is a narrative description of products, services, or results to be delivered by a project. The procurement statement of work includes:
Your project is 70% complete and within the next two months it will be 100% complete and the deliverable will be handed over to the client. Afterward, you will be assigned to a new project. You have your staff but they are worried about their jobs. What type of organizational structure is this?
You have joined a new organization and are assigned a project. This is a new type of project but the organization has completed many similar projects in the past. You decide to review the lessons learned from past projects. You go to the archives and ask for the lessons learned from past projects. Lessons learned is a part of which of the following?
The client informs you that he noticed some parts of the work are not being completed by your team. You ensure him you will look into it and give a proper response after verifying the facts. Which document will you refer to verify it?
Your project is delayed and you are trying to compress the schedule so that you can bring your project on track. While reviewing the activities of your project, you notice that plumbing work starts after completing electrical work. You discuss these two activities with your team members and reach a conclusion that these two activities can start at the same time. Therefore, you make a change to the plan to start these two activities together. Which technique are you using here?
You are developing a video game for a client. The cost of the project is 250,000 USD. To date, you have spent 100,000 USD and you have completed the 30% of the project. Upon a review of the project you find that, due to an error, you are over budget and from now onward you can move ahead as planned. What is the EAC of the project?
You have delivered a batch of spare parts to a client. The client performed an inspection of these items and found that they do not meet their quality requirements. The client is not satisfied and they have returned the items to you which requires a lot of rework. What will happen if you do not meet the quality requirements of the product?
Two of your team members are having conflicts about their roles and responsibilities. In attempting to resolve this conflict you ask them to refer to the responsibility assignment matrix. Which of the following statements is not true about the responsibility assignment matrix?
You see an opportunity if you complete the project ahead of time: you may get a new project. Therefore, you try to complete the project early, but due to lack of resources, you are only able to shorten the duration of a few activities by starting the parallel or partially-parallel. Which risk response strategy are you employing here?
You have advertised in several newspapers to inform interested contractors to apply for a bid for some of your procurement needs. Which process are you currently in?
You have been given four possible projects and must select one project to work. The NPV of each project is: 10,000 USD, 15,000 USD, 20,000 USD, and 25,000 USD. Which of the following projects will you select?
You are developing a smartphone, when suddenly your competitor has launched a smartphone which is better than yours. Therefore, you make some changes to the product which causes WBS elements to be amended heavily. What kind of changes have you made to your project?
In procurement management, you have many documents to help you such as request for quotation, request for information and invitation for bid, etc. These documents are knowns as:
Management is asking you to provide them with the report on the project's status and progress. Therefore, you start preparing a report on it. You are preparing a chart where you are using a virtual activity (an aggregation of several activities) showing the summary levels so management can understand it easily. This virtual activity is known as:
You want to buy a cell phone and you have two options. The first phone is cheaper and offers less functionality, but it has a proven track record of good stability and reliability. The second phone is a feature rich, costly phone but it has some stability and reliability issues. Which of the following statements is correct about these phones?
You have joined a new project which is having a lot of conflicts. Management has asked you analyze the causes of these conflicts and provide suggestions to reduce them as they are affecting the project performance. Which of the following is least likely to be a cause of conflict in a project?
You have identified risks and now have asked your team members to analyze which risks have the largest potential impact on the project. Which of the following tools will help you find this impact?
You have two projects with NPV 10,000 USD and 15,000 USD. Since the NPV of the second project is higher, you will select it. In this case, the cost 10,000 USD will be known as:
You are managing two projects. The first project is to design a simulator for a client which he will use in his driving school. The second project is to install a security system on a client's premises to ensure its security around the clock. What is your role here?
Due to improper cost planning, your cost performance is not as planned and you are over budget. Therefore, you again estimate the cost of the project and find that you will require more money to complete the project. This will require an update of the cost baseline. What will you do?
Assumptions and constraints are important for your project. They help shape your project management plan. Any wrong assumptions or constraints can severely impact your project. How will your project be affected when a constraint turns out to be false?
You have a project with a budget of 100,000 USD. The duration of the project is 20 months, and the work is evenly distributed throughout the duration. After 10 months, you review the project's progress and you find that 55% of the work is completed and 65,000 USD has been spent. Based on the above information, you come to the conclusion that:
For question number 344, determine the estimate at completion assuming the future cost performance is same as the past cost performance.
You have been producing rods with the following lengths: 50 cm, 55 cm, 62 cm, 65 cm, and 68 cm. What is the standard deviation?
You are working as a project manager in a functional organization. You have limited power and no team member reports to you directly. In this situation, which power will you use to get the job done?
During risk planning, you encounter a risk that you find difficult to manage; therefore, you make small changes to your project management plan to eliminate the risk. Which risk response strategy are you using here?
To create the status report, you have collected the data for value of completed work, actual duration, actual completed work, etc. These data are examples of:
The client needs a small modification in the project scope, and he discusses it with you. He has told you that this may not increase the cost and may actually save some money. What will your next step be?
You are using a technique involving the project's risk and uncertainty to find the probability of completing the project under different situations. What process is this?
You are constructing an office building. The cost of this project is 200,000 USD, and the duration of the project is 8 months. During the performance review in the sixth month, you find that 65% of the work is completed and the cost performance index is 1.3. The Planned Value (PV) will be:
You have been assigned a very critical project. Although your team members are experts and efficient, your team performance is poor. What will you do to improve your team performance?
You have been given a task to find cost estimates for several projects, and your organization will submit its bid based on these estimates. The financial position of the organization is not very good; therefore, they tell you that they cannot invest more than 500,000 USD. They also give you a leeway of 10% on either side of it. This leeway is a part of:
You are developing a product for your client. During the development of the product, the client has indicated that he needs some changes in the product, so you process his request. How do you manage changes in product specification?
Work authorization is a subsystem of the project management system, which is used by the project manager or any authorized person to run the project with command and control. Which statement is not true about the work authorization system?
Your organization manages many projects at one time. For your project, you have been assigned a place in a building to utilize for your project related activities. However, to use this facility, you have to pay the electricity bill which is distributed to all project teams. This electricity bill is an example of:
You have been assigned as a project manager for an ongoing project. While reviewing the project documents you notice that the project does not have a risk management plan. What will your next step be?
The client is asking for many changes in the project which is causing you to change the baseline many times. You are constantly estimating the cost of impact and raising the change request, and once it is approved, you will update the cost baseline. Which of the following should be updated frequently?
You are constructing an office building. Work has started and you are in the middle of your project. You feel that if you add one more floor to the building it will cost much less than if the client decides to add it in the future. This change, however, will lead to a change in various baselines and the project charter as well. Therefore, you discuss the issue with all relevant stakeholders, and after their agreement, you process these change requests. In all of these changes, who is responsible for making this change in the project charter?
You have a project with a cost of 10,000 USD, and the duration is 10 months. Five months have passed, 45% of the work is completed and you have spent 5,500 USD. The value of this 45% of the work is known as:
Management is sending a team of experts for a risk audit. You inform management that you have already completed the risk review process and did not find any shortcomings, so there is no need for a risk audit. However, management is firm on their decision. Which of the following is true about the risk audit and risk review?
Your project is delayed because of some regulatory issues and the client has asked you to stop the work until he gets government clearance. The project team members are afraid that the project may be terminated early and you may need to enter into the close project process. In which of the following cases will you not perform the close project or close phase process?
A new law is going to come into effect; after five years, all motor engines are required to be Euro IV compliant. Therefore, your company has given you a project to ensure that all process and procedures are modified to produce Euro IV compliant engines when the law goes into effect. This project has arisen because of which need?
Your organization has received two possible projects. The first project will give you 50,000 USD profit but it is a bit time consuming, and the second project will give you 35,000 USD and it will complete earlier than the first project. Therefore, you select the second project. What is the opportunity cost of selecting the second project?
You are determining the probability and impact of risks in order to find the expected monetary value and then the contingency reserve. Which of the following statements is true about the expected monetary value?
You are managing two projects. The first project is to design and construct a school building, and the second project is to construct an office building for your company's employees. What is your current role?
You have been appointed as project manager for an ongoing project. Upon reviewing the project documents, you notice that a WBS was not created and work is moving ahead without it. What will your next step be?
A risk occurred in your project. This was an identified risk, so the risk owner implemented the risk response plan and the risk was mitigated. Which of the following is least likely to be updated due to this action?
Your organization is evaluating a project to decide whether to go or not go for it. The estimated cost of this project is 500,000 USD and the duration of this project is three years. At the end of the first year, you will get 200,000 USD revenue, at the end of the second year, you will get 170,000 USD, and at the end of the third year, you will get 200,000 USD. Considering 8% discount rate, which of the following statements is true about the NPV of the project?
Many problems have arisen in your project and you are finding it difficult to manage. You decide to identify the problems, quantify the source, and solve them. Which of the following tools will you use here?
You are in the process of planning human resources and developing the roles and responsibilities for your team members. Which of the following will you not address during this process?
During the risk qualification process, you have identified many risks with a low impact or probability of happening. How will you deal with these risks?
You have an agreement with one of your suppliers which allows you to make limited changes in some exceptional situations. Under one such situation, you make some changes in the scope of the work. What will your next step be?
You are analyzing whether the stakeholders are resistant, neutral, or supporting and noting down all the information in a table. What tool is this?
John has been assigned a task to build a facility where different types of bicycles can be produced. John builds this facility and hands it over to Andrew to run it. What is Andrew's role?
Your project is complete and the product is ready to be delivered. The client inspects the deliverable and accepts it. What process is this?
You have been assigned as a project manager for an ongoing project. After joining the project, you start reviewing the project document and notice that the WBS dictionary has many discrepancies. Due to these discrepancies, which of the following will be least affected?
Based on the below given diagram, which statement is correct?
You have been producing ball bearings in large numbers. For this kind of process, what technique will you use to verify if the products are of the right quality?
You are having some issues in your project, therefore, you bring all team members into the war room to resolve the issues. What is the purpose of the war room?
You have two mutually exclusive events, which have a chance of happening of 15% and 25%. What is the chance that one of them will occur?
Due to a shortage of funds, a client asks you to end the project immediately. What will your next step be?
Which of the following is not an interpersonal skill that the project manager will use to manage stakeholders' expectations?
You have bought a piece of land with a worth of 120,000 USD. You also have an agreement with the company that if you return this land to them after 2 years, they will give you 160,000 USD. What is the appreciation rate?
During the execution phase many small, unforeseen incidents happen which you manage with a workaround. What will your first step be after managing these unforeseen incidents?
You are designing a motor engine. During the design phase, you find that a technique required to develop the piston is a bit more advanced than the technology you currently possess. Although you can acquire this technology, it is too time consuming. On the other hand, there is a supplier that can provide you with the same component but at a higher cost. You are still discussing the options with your team members. Which technique are you using here?
Which of the following is not a management skill that a project manager will use to get support from the stakeholders?
You are responsible for IT maintenance in your organization. The head of the IT department comes to you with an internet security expert and tells you to disable auto login and force authentic login based on a new password. The password will be 15 characters long and consist of letters, numerals, and one special character, and this password must expire after every 30 days. This is an example of:
Based on the table given below, find out which activity will have the free float?
For the table given in question 390, what will the free float be for the identified activity?
Based on the table below, which of these statements is correct?
Your organization is following a methodology where the long term approach is customer satisfaction, and to achieve this objective all members of your organization participate. What methodology is this?
When any phase closes, some type of hand-off happens. Which of the following options is not a name for this point?
You get some information that two of your members are going to have a conflict on some issues and this may affect your project performance. To stop this conflict from happening, what kind of communication will you use initially?
A SWOT analysis helps you identify opportunities which arise from organizational strengths threats dues to its weakness. According to this analysis, analyzing the strengths and weaknesses is a part of:
You are performing the inspection of a deliverable with your contractor to determine if the deliverable is meeting requirements. After being satisfied with the inspection, you accept the deliverable. Which process are you in?
The Monitor Stakeholder Engagement process helps you increase the effectiveness of stakeholders' engagement with your project. Which of the following is not an output of this process?
You are going to apply for registration of your company in a new country. There are two routes to apply within the registration process: the first route is the normal process where you have to pay a fee and become registered. The other is an express process where you have to pay more to get registered faster. You need to register your company quickly, otherwise, you will not be able to apply for a project. Your organization has given you free hand to get registered. What will your next step be?
You have signed a Cost Plus Incentive Fee contract with the client. The details of the contract are as follows: Target cost: 300,000 USD Target fee: 30,000 USD Maximum fee: 40,000 USD Minimum fee: 15,000 USD Share ratio: 60/40 You have completed the work and the actual cost is 270,000 USD. The amount you will be paid from the client will be:
Your developer has provided u with an estimate based on the "cost per line of code". What type of estimate did the developer use to provide this information?
A definitive estimate is:
all of the following are inputs to the cross-budgeting process expect?
Analogues estimating is a tool technique used in both Time and Cost management process. What is the best description of how analogues estimating is performed?
Cost budgeting is defined as
Due to recent company downsizing u can only authorize 1 of the 2 projects u really planed to complete this year. You have decided to select the project with the NPV of $95k and proceed to cancel the other project which had an NPV of $37k what are the opportunity costs associated with this new decision?
Analogues estimating is a form of
Two projects have exactly the same pay back period but project A has a smaller IRR than project B.You should choose
The expected accuracy level of estimates during the initiation phase of project should be:
Analogues estimating is most accurate when:
Should historical information be used during resource planning?
Analogus estimating is a :
Cost estimates:
In cost monitoring, the s-curve depicts the relation between:
Inorder to produce a cost base line,the project manager requires
Which of the following is an indirect cost?
Which of the following method is not a depreciation method ?
An ordre of magnitude estimate is not also known as
When the expected cash flow s -curve is above the cost performance base line the project manager should
Cost estimates may also be expressed in hours days etc, as long as
What is the Delphi technique?
Which statement is true?
Which factors should you consider when adding a resource to your project team?
The Delphi method is best suited for:
You are on the project selection team and must decide on only one project to approve. Of the following 2 possible project which would you select and why? Calgary: payback period is 12 months ,and NPV is 350 Toronto: payback period is 24 months, and NPV is 400
There are two types of decision model,comparative and constrained that can be used for the project selection during the initiation process.Of the following decision model examples, which one are categorized as benefit measurement or scoring/ rating models?
You are reviewing several feasiblity reports.One report shows a benefit cost ratio of 2.1.This means:
A project has payback period of 1 and a half of years. What does that mean?
Your technical team leader who you highly respect has identified a design error that will mostly likely interfere with the meeting documented technical performance objectives. The best action to take is to: A . Decrease the performance value to equal the assessed value. B. Reduce the overall technical complexity of the project. C. Increase the spacified value to set a new performance goal. D. Develop alternative solutions to the problem. 14. You are currently working for York Automobile,a market leader in manufacturing cars. Due to a shortage in petroleum based fuel as well as advent of new technology, the company has decided to venture into producing electrically powered cars.This project will be initiated due to a :
First thing Tuesday morning ,one of your team member drops into your office looking very thrilled. He eagerly tells you he is adding extra functionality to the project without imparting the cost the schedule. As the project manager your first step should be:
The "rolling wave" or "moving window" advocates the use of WBS decomposition and is used most frequently in the _____________ process.
The engineering department has flagged a concern about the expensive interface cards recommended to purchase for your switch cutover project. They believe they can find a less expensive but acceptable card and submit a change request to do necessary research.Their request is the result of:
You are conducting a product analysis in scope planning by prioritizing spoken and unspoken customer wows, wants and needs; translating these needs into technical characteristics and specification to build and deliver a quality product or service by focusing everybody toward customer satisfaction. This process is called :
Out puts from the initiation process includes:
The scope management process involves all of the following expects:
As the project manager you will be required to report periodically to upper management on the progress of the project. What item below will you require to report your progress as the basis for the budget ,schedule ,resource allocation and scope definition.
You have negotiated a major deliverable with a contractor several of your colleagues th have utilized in the past without problems. Its is critical the contactor meet an August 15 deliverable.this is an example of (n):
All of the following are tools for the scope verification expects:
D 11. C 21. C 2. A 12. D 22. C 3. D 13. D 23. A 4. C 14. A 24. D 5. A 15. A 25. C 6. C 16. A 7. D 17. C 8. A 18. D 9. C 19. C 10. D 20. C 1. The WBS can be used for which of the followings?
Scope Verification is
The process of creating a WBS results in
Which of the following DOES NOT describe how far each element in WBS should be broken down
The outputs of scope change control are
The first step in WBS creation is
Work package is a
Going from Level 3 to Level 4 in the work breakdown structure can result in:
A project manager believes that modifying the scope of the project may provide added value for the customer. The project manager should:
Inspection is used for both Scope Verification and Quality Control. But first deals with --of the work while second deals with --of the product
A 2. C 3. B 4. C 5. C 6. A 7. A 8. B 9. C 10. D 1. A Project Charter includes
The customer wants to make a major change in the project scope when project is mostly complete. The project manager should. E) Make the change F) Inform the customer of the impact of the change G) Refuse the change H) Complain to management 3. The key reason to use a WBS is to E) Organize the work F) Prevent work from slipping through the cracks G) Provide a basis for estimating the project H) All of the above 4. What does having a project charter do for the project managers?
The subdivision of project deliverables into smaller components is called
In which phase feasibility studies performed
You are asked to take over a project with lot of pending scope change requests. To assess the change impact, you should get hold of
A matrix organization begins a new project. Project manager knows that the team is more responsive to their functional managers than to PM. To overcome this, PM decides to prepare
Which of the following is a good objective?
Scope changes on project are inevitable, however, scope changes can be minimized by:
D 2. B 3. D 4. C 5. C 6. A 7. B 8. B 9. C 10. C 11. C 1. Which of the following is not a major process of Project Procurement Management?
The process of identifying which project needs can be best met by procuring products or services outside the project organization is called ________________
The `Product Description' is generally broader than a `Statement of Work'. This statement
A contract that involves payment to the seller for its actual costs is called a
Which of the following is/are input(s) for Solicitation Planning
Which of the following is not a Tool and Technique for Source Selection.
Which of the following is not an input to Contract Administration.
____________________ involves clarification and mutual agreement on the structure and requirements of the contract prior to the signing of the contract.
Make or Buy Analysis is a Tool and Technique for
The process of obtaining quotations, bids, offers or proposals as appropriate is called
On his first project assignment as the project manager, the project manager encounters disagreements among highly technical team members. How would the project manager BEST deal with the conflict?
Giving a team member a corner office is different than giving him health benefits because a corner office is a(n):
Team members are arguing about the location of specification limits on a control chart. The discussion is becoming heated when the project manager walks in and says, "It seems that the real problem here is that we do not have enough information about the customer' s specifications. Let's " This is an example of:
During project planning in a matrix organization, the project manager determines that additional human resources are needed. From whom would he request these resources?
You have a firm fixed price contract with a clause stating that all changes in the scope of work must be written. One of your team members verbally instructed the seller to add a change that resulted in a 100% task overrun. Under this situation, what conflict management strategy should you use (as the project manager) with the team member?
While creating the agenda for a status meeting with the team, a project manager receives input from one team member that an item should be added. Another team member says the team is not ready to resolve the item during the meeting. After much discussion, the project manager decides to put the item on the agenda as an initial discussion item only. Which conflict resolution technique is the project manager using?
A project has several teams. Team C has missed several deadlines in the past. This has caused team D to have to crash the critical path several times. As the project leader for team D, you should meet with the:
A project manager must publish a project schedule. Activities, start/end times and resources are identified. What should the project manager do next?
What leadership style should you employ during the first two weeks of project planning?
The project team is working on an important and complex project that requires a lot of coordination. Under these circumstances, the BEST strategy is to:
The engineering resource group, a matrixed organization of which a project manager' s project team is a part, has a policy of no bonus for project work. The project manager's current project has an aggressive timeline and a difficult technical obstacle to overcome. A new product offering is dependent on this project's success in the current timeline. The project manager has heard grumbling from his team about the fact that they cannot be rewarded for their effort. What is the FIRST thing the project manager should do?
You are a project manager leading a cross-functional project team in a weak matrix environment. None of your project team members report to you functionally and you do not have the ability to directly reward their performance. The project is difficult, involving tight date constraints and challenging quality standards. Which of the following types of project management power will likely be the MOST effective in this circumstance?
Your best programmer is an independent contractor. Recently, you learned that she is working on a project in the evening for one of your competitors. Your BEST course of action is to:
What is the MOST correct statement about conflict?
A project manager is meeting with a team member and says, "I know you want to become involved in meetings with the customer. Because of your performance on the project so far, I have rearranged things so you can become involved with the customer." This is an example of:
While resource planning for your project, you visited the functional manager of engineering many times but she refused to supply resources for the project. First, the excuse was that her department was too busy. The next time, the department was undergoing reorganization. This is causing your project to slip the schedule. The lack of which of the following is the MOST probable reason for her lack of support?
You work in a matrix organization when a team member comes to you to admit he is having trouble with his task. Although not yet in serious trouble, the team member admits he is uncertain of how to perform part of the work on the task. He suggests a training class available next week. Where should the cost of the training come from?
A new project manager has just been assigned a project that is in progress. The project is two weeks behind schedule. The team members are about to be distributed to another project based on original time estimates provided by the functional manager. What is the FIRST step the project manager should take?
At the end of a two-year project, the key stakeholders agree that the project has met all its goals and objectives outlined in the project charter and further defined in the scope and statement of work. The project is within budget and has finished on time. The management of one of the functional areas is quite upset because over half of his staff quit during the project citing long hours and lack of management support. What is the MOST correct statement about this project?
A team member is not performing well on the project because she is inexperienced in system development work. There is no one else available who is better qualified to do the work. What is the BEST solution for the project manager?
The "halo effect" refers to the tendency to:
Which of the following is the highest point of Maslow' s hierarchy?
In which motivation theory do hygiene factors play a part?
Which motivational theory says that working conditions, salary and relationships at work do not improve motivation?
In Maslow' s hierarchy of needs, self-actualization means self-fulfillment, growth and:
Which motivational theory uses the concept of theory Y?
C 2. A 3. B 4. B 5. B 6. A 7. D 8. B 9. B 10. A 11. B 12. B 13. B 14. B 15. B 16. B 17. D 18. D 19. C 20. C 21. C 22. A 23. A 24. C 25. B 26. C 1. Once Signed a contract is legally binding unless
Although they may have variety of side effects, the primary objective of incentive clause in a contract is to
With a clear Scope of Work, a contractor completes work as specified, but the buyer is not pleased with the results. The contract is considered to be:
When do all of the processes of Procurement Planning, Solicitation Planning, Solicitation, Source Selection, Contract Administration and Contract Close-out are followed
The primary objective of negotiations is to
The daily lease cost for an item is $230. To purchase the item the investment cost id $1000 and the daily cost is $30. When should you go for purchasing the item
Of different forms of Contracts, which one puts the buyer at highest risk that the cost will increase
Of different forms of Contracts, which one is unilateral (signed by one party)
Given are the statistics for a Project. Target Cost = $220,000; Target Fee = $35,000; Target Price = $255, 000; Sharing Ratio = 80/20; Actual Cost = $200,000. Calculate the Fee and Final Price for the project
Given are the statistics for a Project. Target Cost = $150,000; Target Fee = $30,000; Target Price = $180,000; Sharing Ratio = 60/40; Ceiling Price = $200,000; Actual Cost = $210,000. Calculate the Fee and the Final Price for the project
Which of the following must be present to have a contract
Which of the following best describes the project manager's role during the contracting process
A key role of the project manager during negotiations is to
In a fixed price contract, the fee or profit is
Which of the following is an advantage of centralized contracting
During communication the use of __________ is a means of giving feedback to the speaker by rephrasing the speaker's word to ensure that there is a good understanding of the message being sent.
In communication , the receiver filter messages based on all but which of the following?
According to the PMP code of professional conduct , which of the following is a responsibility to the profession?
When analyzing risks using the certainty vs uncertainty spectrum,the term "unknownunknown is best described as ___________ .
You are attending a meeting with your purchasing department to explain the recent approved scope change and assist in negotiating the changes required to the contract. The vendor representative states up front t the meeting ,that all negotiations must be Complited by 2.30pm to allow him to catch his flight considering the current city traffic issues. What kind of negotiation technique is this?
Of the following needs, which one is ranked highest according to Maslow's hierarchy of needs?
What are the steps you should take formally to stop the project?
Defining the scope of the project is one of the initial steps in the PM process. Defining project scope well is crucial to the success of the project as it establishes a contract between the project client and the pm. For some pm's this is a legal contract. For others it is less formal. In either case it is an agreement to which the project client and PM both making a commitment. Which of the following is the most applicable to a scope statement?
Collocation can mean that :
What is the document that gives the PM the authority to apply organizational resources?
The communication expediter of a project is :
When entering into a contract , the objective of the buyer is to:
You are reviewing a risk of lists identified by the team and now need to "categorize"the risk s which will facilitate the risk monitoring process. Which of the following risk events would present the highest risk to the "schedule category" of risks.
The "Tuckman Model " refers to the 4 stage of the team development .What is the correct sequence of stages each team will go through?
An input to staff Acquisition does not include:
Pareto diagrams cause and effect diagrams flow charts and treand analysis are used in quality:
The main purpose of risk management planning is to create a plan for dealing with each high priority risk that you have identified in the various phase. A good risk management plan will not contain ____________.
What does the accounting term BCR 1.5 mean?
From the "view exhibit" we can state task _____________ is the furtherest behind schedule task _________ has the largest budget varience.
From the view "exhibit" button ,which task list contains the critical list for the path?
You need to define the high level project objectives .Which of the following technique is the best method to define the project objectives?
Outputs of administrative closure include all of the following except.
Your team has created several documents that serve as historical records for future projects.This historical documents are archived:
Cost estimates may not be express in :
Given the following sample of data : 40,20,20,50,70, and 75:What is the mode?
A product description is used to :
From the "view exhibit " button, which task has a favourable cost varience of $250?
A control chart shows that the last 8 frames produced were all a little less then the average weight. You know you need to action this because the control chart violates the:
Value engineering and analysis is performed to:
Life circle cost is using in Project Cost Management:
From the "view exhibit" button , how many days of free flaot does activity E have?
Who orginates the project charter ?
Product documentation is a input to what process?
The best approach to conflict resolution is:
Which of the following activities is completed during scope verification?
Generally speaking an advantage of a fixed price contract is:
A relationship in a activity-on-arrow diagram are(is):
your project work was put on hold for 6 weeks due to the unforeseen backorder of the hardware equipment. You have confirmed with the supplier the hardware will be delivered to the second week of December. In order to keep to the customer schedule which is the first priority considerable overtime will be required by the technical team members during the upcoming holiday season. You know the technical team was only working over the holidays with a skeleton crew .What is the best action to take to
A war room is ________________
Look at the following depreciation example : Depriciable balance is $10,000,expected useful life is 4 years. Depriciations in the first year under double declining balance depreciation is _____________.
There are a number of estimating levels of accuracy , which one is defind as the budget estimate?
The ___________ theory is a method to determine the amount of risk ,management will tolerate on a project.
A project manager is working with quality professionals in the quality assurance phase of the project. Which of the following activities is being performed?
During an initial meeting to establish a communication plan with the project stake holders, your senior project manager distributes photocopies of sample graphs and charts.Since you have just completed studying and successfully writing your PMP exam,You immediately recognize these graphs and chart from PMI's PMBOOK guide.What do you do in these situation?
There are 4 people in the project team , and the project managers add 5 more. How many channels of communication are there now?
A risk was identified that "Rebecca " is the only person in the company that has the expertise to complete a critical task on your project.Rebecca advised during the planning phase that she is scheduled for elective surgery at an unknown date. If the hospital calls , she will go on medical leave for 3 months. Of course the hospital calls and Rebacca goes on medical leave. Since the task is on the critical path you need to acquire a consultant as soon as possible. To do this ,the project manager
Which of the following items are not considered accomplishing integrity in project management?
Your project you just complited , was the first time your company ever contracted a 3 party vendor to perform some of the project work. As part of the close out process,you are documenting the lesion learned. Which of the following is the contract lesions learned include?
You are working on a global project that will require temporary hiring of teams in 4 different countries in 5 months testing phase. A project leader from one of the country takes initiative to help acquire these resources by sending you a list of names that are obviously related to the project leader.Your first course of action should be to: A . Investigate to find out if hiring family is a common practice in the project leaders country. B. Ask for the resumes of the individuals and determine if they are qualified candidates. C. Ask the project leader to send additional name of people that are not family members. D.Thank the leader for their initiative but let him/her know that you will require the resources yourself. 52. A contingency plan___________.
All of the following are examples of theory X assumptions with the exception of:
You have determined the duration for your project is 18.5 months with a standard deviation of 1.2 months. What technique will u use to determine the confidence level and the probability of completing the project on a specific day ?
Caltural noise in the communication channel can be caused by all of the following except?
If PV $ 24000 and AC is $27000 and EV is 25000 we can report the project as follow:
"For Consideration" in contract management means:
The contemporary view of conflict is that :
A cost base line is an output of the _____________ management process.
Varience analysis , treand analysis and earned value analysis are tools and technique used for :
There are a variety of methods to select a projects. Which of the following is not a project selection criteria method.
You are a junior project manger with a little over 3 years actual project experience .You have just started to working on your first international project.After spending the 3 weeks in foreign you are feeling very disoriented .This known as :
A deliverable-oriented grouping of project component is (n):
All of the following statement are true of administrative closure except:
The method for calculating earned value should be agreed to before the work begins and it is best to keep the earned value calculation method as simple as possible.What is not a method of reporting earned value?
You are working through the initiation phase of your project for a new client that involves opening new operations in 3 new locations. Several of the functional managers have very different views on how the project should be managed and what the deliverable should be.As the project manager for this project for this project which of the following is the best thing for you to do?
All program manager have been asked to come up with a new estimate at completion for their in-progress project. The most accurate method to develop the new estimate is to:
Your next door neighbour is a team member on a project as a business analyst. She mentions to you that she had met with her project manager today to talk about a really good idea she had for a useful change to the project. She expresses frustration to you because she fully expected approval to go ahead with the change, but instead ,she was requested to write a report documenting the specific benefit on the change. As a project manager yourself what would be the most appropriate response?
Which statement is not true about Maslow's highest hierarchy of needs?
Inputs to administrative closure include all of the following except:
From the "view exhibit" button, What is the Late Start day of activity G?
Which of the following statement is true?
Your manager gives you a scope of work and ask you to begin work immediately and provide her with a schedule. What should you do first?
Expert judgement will often be required to access the input of initiation , Such expertise may be provided by any group or individual with specialized knowledge or training and is available from many sources ,including the following.
Quality controls includes a number of activities and technique within a project that ensure that the organization quality's objective are being met .Which of the following is not considered part of the quality control process.
The tools and technique in the contract admin process are :
Risk monitoring and control involves all of the following task except:
Which earned value formula correctly illustrate the cost varience of a project incurrency?
Due to bankruptcy reason ,your current vendor has been forced to withdraw from your project. your purchasing department has now informed you the new vendor has been selected, approved and the resources will be arriving on the site ,first thing next Monday. As the project manager what is the first thing you should do on Monday?
Formal acceptance by the client or sponsor of the project is prepared and distributed during the ____________ process.
Considerable time has been spent negotiating the contract between both the vendor and the purchaser over the last 7 months .Today is suppose to be the last meeting to finalize one outstanding issue. At this meeting emotions are now at an all time high, when out of the blue ,the vendor starts to pack her briefcase to leave. What type of negotiating strategy is the vendor using in this situation.
As the project manager which of the following documents will you use to ensure project closure?
What is the most effective document to review to learn about the project's procedure for managing risk?
Which of the following is a definition of liquidated damages?
Which of the following activities is not a part of administrative closure?
Status meeting are held to:
Which of the following is not a output of the cost control process?
Labour rate is calculated by :
You are reviewing several contracts to determine the earned value techniques to be used for performing reporting. One of the contracts scope of work contains a repetitive process. Since this contracts entails 70%of the total project work, which earned value reporting technique would be the best to use?
At the PMI networking member meeting, you chat with another project manager on different methods to highlight risks on your current project. The very next day you receive a zip file in your email a risk software from the project manager that was developed in her company. The software has a copy right date of 2000.As a PMP what action should you take in this situation.
One of the project team members meet with you as the project manager during project execution. He advices you several of the team members believe the project cannot meet its quality standards. Your action to this information is to call a meeting of the effected stake holders to walk through the problem. Which step of the quality management process are you involved in?
The project manager typically share problems with you and the team and prepares evaluating solution as a group. Which type of leadership style is your project manager using?
As a seasoned project manager, you have come to understand the importance of communication and network. During your annual performance appraisal, your senior project manager writes "aggressive insight" on the comment section of the performance appraisal form. What does he mean by that comment?
Management had decided to crash a project in order to avoid penalty payments for late deliveries. Additional cost are expected. To crash the project either overtime or additional resources should be assigned to:
Facilitating and core process differ in that core are sequential in nature facilitating are intermittent and dependent on the type of project.What are not on the facilitating process?
In which stage of the negotiation meeting is party determining their strength and weakness?
Which of the following diagram supports only one relationship?
Which of the following is not a tool or technique for cost control?
What is a "Should Cost" estimate?
There are a multitude of consequences if we do not risk management such as : significant cost overruns; schedule delays; inability to achieve stated technical objective (s); project descoping; fines and penalties etc. What are the downsides or negative to doing risk management?
As a vendor you are participating in a bidders conference for a potential new client. It is clear to you the buyer has not clearly defined the full scope of work just yet. What type of would you be most concerned about negotiating with the client.
Not all stake holders are equal .It is helpful to identify and classify the type of stakeholders and clearly define roles and responsibility of each group of stakeholders. It is important to define who provides input, who votes on what issues , and who has vote power. Which of the following best describe why stakeholders are necessary in a project?
The quality team for the project consists of several groups. Which of the following project participant plays the most important role in the quality function?
Earned value can best be defined as:
As part of project to establish a large vegetable growing operation for a food processing plant ,You are required to do several soil samples at the designated agricultural site. At the next PM meeting you must present your findings from the soil samples. You have received from the testing lab, the results from almost 80% of the soil samples but there is approximately 20% of the sample results still missing. Since you actually did a few more soil samples than was initially required , You will:
Resource planning results in a description of what type of resources are required in what quantities. This plan is then used to support the subsequent process.
As project manager for a new communication project ,you received a PM services proposal which includes curriculum vitae for someone whom you have some knowledge of. This CV indicates that the individual has a PMP although you know that it is not true. Do you :
Generally speaking the detail and frequency of performance speaking increases:
Destructive team roles includes which of the following?
An advantage of decentralized contracting is :
What is the Seller's risk objective in Project procurement Management?
When communicating the sender is responsible for:
A firm fixed contract is one that is:
Which of the 7 main statistical processing charts determines possible cause of potential problems and actual problems?
All of the following are cost estimating tools except:
The project is formally initiated or authorized to continue when:
Which is not used as a tool and technique for information gathering during the risk identification process?
General management encompasses:
Project Management is the art and science of converting abstract into concrete or vision in reality. The realization can be most effective through formula understanding of project management process. What are the 5 management process?
All of the following statements concerning project stakeholders are true except?
The difference between an activity's schedule completion and actual completion is called:
From the "view exhibit " button how many days of float does activity G have?
Project performance is impacted by 4 basic cultures. Which of the following is not one of the 4 basic culture?
Which of the following are not categorized as Herzberg's hygiene factors?
You are writing a document identifying the business need for a project which includes a description of the product to be created by the project and high level objectives and goals .What is your role in the project?
Aids in staff acquisition do not include:
As the project manager you send out a weekly report to the team identifying exact to the day where the project stands. What type of report you are communicating to the team?
The closing progress includes :
The major process in project integration do not include:
The PMI officer resolution has just filled final resolution regarding a grievance against you. Can you appeal?
What is meant by the phrase" The fundamental principal of proportionate expenditure must never be violated when selecting management and mitigation strategies"?
What is not a true statement about Risk?
what is Buyer's risk objective in Project Procurement Management?
What is the meaning of `ethnocentriisim'?
You are teaching a class of junior project leaders the benefit of calculating and understanding schedule variance(SV).Your class is using the following value to determine the `health' of project. PV=$220,000 EV= 200,000, AC=280,000. According to your analysis the SV and hence the status of the project is:
As, the customer you have decided the contract out a scope of work that you are not able to define very well. You plan to be "hands on" and actively participate with your own forces during the performance of the work. Of the following contracts type, which would be the preferred contract type to select under this scenario?
Customer risk is highest with:
According to standard statistical control rules if the data result reflect 7 consecutive data points on either side of the mean, this tells you:
A histogram that is order by frequency of occurrence and shows how many results were generated by type or identified cause is called a :
In a matrix organization, both the functional and project manager shares certain responsibilities. Which of the following is not a responsibility of the project manager?
What is unilateral contract?
What is one of the ways that a contract typically does not end?
Administrative closure includes all the following expert:
A playground fencing project was FPQ'd at $6 per foot. The play area has 4 equal side of 125 feet each and first requires the installation of 2 round cement posts for decorative purposes. 100 feet of fencing can be ereected per day once the cement posts are installed. The 2 cement posts costs $250 to install and take oneday for both to be installed. At the end of day three one side of the fence and 2/3 second side have been completed , What is the current status of the project?
Which of the following is not aid in achieving consensuas?
Project manager must carefully select the appropriate mode when managing conflict .Which of the following modes provide resolution when managing conflict ?
During communications the sender is not responsible for:
Which is not a tool or technique used in the quantitative risk analysis process?
Each project life cycle phase can act as a control point to measure progress and determine if the project should continue (go/no go decision ).These control points are called ______________.
Given the following set of data: 40 20,20,50,70 and 75: what is the median?
Which of the following are not example of barriers?
Internal rate of return is:
Several months ago you completed an intranet design website project .This intranet site houses sensitive company data and high -security access is crucial. You are now working on another high security project and you notice what appears to be a flaw or hole `in ` the security code. However the access sequence is so obscure that you are certain no one has been able to break security yet. What should you do?
In general the following statements are true about a project , except when it is:
The graphic displays of results over time ,of a process used to determine the states are called:
Formal acceptance of a project can be described when:
From the "view exhibit" button , how many days of free float does activity H have?
Which of the represents the different channels of communication?
One of the 9 "ilities" or attributes of qualities is "Availability". Availability means the probability of a product being capable of performing a required function under the specified condition when called upon. The key parts to availability are:
Which is not a true statement about the 5 project process group?
Every culture is governed by five fundamental dimensions. Which of the following is not one of those dimensions?
Project managers working in successful ,projectized environments believe that spend what percentage of their time on communications?
Your risk analysis involving your project scope reflects your project has an 70% chance of completing the scope by a specified date with an 80% chance of receving approval for the scope by a certain date. Based on this data , what is the probability of both events occurring?
A driver's license is required by law before an individual can drive a car .Similarly the project manager requires a ____________ document in order to plan, execute and control a project.
The change control board is _____________.
Your quality control team leader has advice you, the latest control chart data reflects that last 7 books produced were outside the lower control limit. What action should you take as the project manager on this training?
According to the study conducted by Thamhein and Wilemon , which of the following are the top 3 sources of conflict in order of frequency of occurrence during the initiation phase?
Which is not a true statement regarding "influence dd diagram"?
Manual activity sequencing is most effective in the planning of :
Which of the following are the only costs that appear in project contract?
Scope verification is primarily concerned with:
When distributing information, the total message impact on the sender is as follows:
In earned value terms the "CAP" represents the:
Comparative approaches ,scoring models and benefit contribution are all part of :
At a project meeting, you realize that your client has mistakenly assumed that the PMP designation includes professional engineering qualifications. He has asked that certain drawing be modified slightly at the meeting and then sent immediately to production. Your engineering partners approved and stamped the drawings prior to the meeting but are not present. What should you do?
Which of the following is the most key element of contract?
The seller can play all but_____________ when the seller breaches the contract
In your role as a contract project manager ,you are asked to review the plans and satisfactions for a new product for company
One of the 3" responsibilities to the profession" found in the code of professional conduct states that you must adhere to candidate/certificant professional practices.This means that:
You can ____________ the opportunities and___________ risk the most during the ____________ stage.
Qualitative risk analysis is the process of assessing the impact and likelihood of identified risks. What is not true about this process?
In a team meeting ,two team members are arguing intently and their voices are starting to get louder. As the project manager you step into manage the conflict by pointing out the part of conflict that they both agree to in a gentle tone. What type of conflict management are you deploying?
One of your co-workers and long time friend has left the organization. He calls and ask you to send him a list of common project deliverables. He would also like the copies of the templates associated with each. What do you do?
All of the following are characteristics of "Discretionary Dependencies" except:
Globalization had led to the need for project managers to develop new skills. To have a successful international project , project manager must:
Supplier risk is highest with ___________.
There is money remaining in your project budget at completion. You are pleased as there is another piece of work with the customer on the horizon. Your customer suggests that you and he uses the remaining funds to review the results while visiting a weekend resort. He states that his wife will be accompanying him and suggest that your spouse also attends. He indicates that you should charge the expenditure under administrative closeout.
You are competing for a new contract that is triple the value of your current contract. At your interview , you are asked to draw on your previous 2 years of work experiences to explain critical success factors on an effective software development cycle. The interviewer's are familiar with parties you may have worked with and specifically ask who have worked with at two companies. You did not choose names from either of the companies mentioned for your reference list .How should you reply?
One of the project selection criteria is the benefit cost ratio. One potential project you are reviewing has a BCR of 1.22. This indicates that:
You attend an executive presentation at your office. Your project manager presents a maturity model that is identical to a tool you both learned of at a recent conference. She describes the model as the corporate model her team has developed. The executive request that you email the presentation to them. What should you do?
From the "View exhibit " button ,which activity list contains the critical path for the project.
You have been asked to coordinate the visit of a number of key stakeholders to a project site in foreign country. Your local contract advices that you must pay a per-person fee to arrange for efficient processing through the airport security checks. One member of the delegation has concurred that this is necessary based on previous experience. What if any, steps should you take prior to making the payment?
You have developed a very positive , informal relationship with your client. Over coffee, your clients indicates that his company is about to benefit from a very large multi million dollar contracts. He speculates that the stock price will jump up the day after tomorrow. At a social event , you learn that your manager's wife who has invested in the company previously ask you how things are going and what the future prospects might be. What do you tell her?
From the "view exhibit" button , Which task(s) have a CPI over budget?
What is incorrect, or the least true statement about a benefit /cost analysis?
From the "view exhibit" what would the best statement be about the overall project performance?
You are under pressure to release a new version of software program to avoid serious cash penalties and loss of market share. Two days before the targeted release date, a developer brings a potential bug to your attention .Although the developer and a test engineer have been unable to re-create the bug, the feature in question is critical to meeting legal requirements dictated by the governing regulatory body responsible for public safety. What should you do?
Regarding management and leadership all of the following are true except
A company has to make a choice between two projects, because the available resources in money and kind are not sufficient to run both at the same time. Each project would take 9 months and would cost $250,000. 1. The first project is a process optimization which would result in a cost reduction of $120,000 per year. This benefit would be achieved immediately after the end of the project. 2. The second project would be the development of a new product which could produce the following net profits after the end of the project: 1. year: $ 15,000 2. year: $ 125,000 3. year: $ 220,000 Assumed is a discount rate of 5 % per year. Looking at the present values of these projects'revenues in the first 3 years, what is true?
A production process has been defined as part of an industrial equipment manufacturing project. The process is intended to produce steel bolts with a length of 20 cm. The acceptable control limits are 19.955 cm and 20.045 cm. The measurements made at the end of the process yielded the following results: 20.033 cm, 19.982 cm, 19,995 cm, 20.006 cm, 19.970 cm, 19.968 cm, 19.963 cm, 19.958 cm, 19.962 cm, 19.979 cm, 19.959 cm. What should be done?
What are the 4 stages of team development?
During a software project Earned Value Analysis is performed and gives the following results: EV: 523,000; PV: 623,000; AC: 643,000. Which results are correct?
Which of the following is not normally an element of the Project Charter?
Which process is applied to break down the project into smaller, more manageable elements?
Which of the following Tools and Techniques are part of Risk Management Planning?
All of the following statements concerning project stakeholders are true except :
Which of the following is the output of Source Selection?
Which of the following statements is not true?
Which type of leadership is best suited for optimizing team performance in projects?
Where is the result node (outcome) shown on a typical Ishikawa or Fishbone diagram?
A project management team has subcontracted work to a service company. The process of ensuring that this service company's performance meets contractual requirements is called:
What are workarounds in project management?
What are faits accomplis?
During execution of a project which is performed for a customer on a T&M (Time and Material) contract base a new project manager is taking over the assignment. He discovers that two members assigned to the project have charged time without performing any work. Upon further investigation, he determines that this occurred because there were no other project assignments available for these people. The customer is unaware of these facts. What should the project manager do?
In the following network logic diagram start dates are defined as early morning, finish dates are evening. If tasks are scheduled to begin at early start date, what is true?
Which of the following is not considered to be part of Project Resource Management?
Tools and Techniques of Risk Response Planning include:
What are "Global Literacies"?
A project manager performs Earned Value Analysis and finds the following values: EV: 100,000; PV: 125,000; AC: 100,000
During a project the scope of product purchased on a cost reimbursable contract has increased. In the contract the contractor`s indirect costs are calculated as 20 % of the direct costs. What is most likely to be true?
A project management team is evaluating the causes that might contribute to unsatisfactory performance and quality. Which of the following statements is not true?
You are performing a project management audit in your company and find that most of the project plans are neither consistent nor up-to-date. Which of the following statements is not true?
What is active risk acceptance?
Project costs are over budget when
What is a quality audit?
You are assigned as the project manager in a project with an aggressive schedule. During a recent meeting your team complained about the high pressure applied and the many hours of overwork time. What is the preferred solution to handle the problem?
Activity 1 has a duration of 20 days, Activity 2 of 10 days, Activity 3 of 5 days and Activity 4 of 6 days. What is the minimum total duration between the Milestones A and B?
Which of the following statements is true concerning Scope Definition?
All the following statements regarding "whistleblowing" are true except :
Why should assumptions be documented?
All the following statements are true except :
Which of the following statements about diagramming methods is not true?
A project is managed by a project coordinator. Which of the following statements is most likely to be true?
Which of the following statements concerning cross-cultural differences is true?
What are dummy activities?
Which of the following are not cost of quality?
What is a trigger in project risk management?
According to the project plan, a contractor is scheduled to deliver some software components at the end of the day. A regular payment is due to be made to this contractor tomorrow. The project team received a note this morning informing them that the software delivery will be delayed by 2 weeks. This morning, the project team received a note that the software will be delayed by 2 weeks. How should the project management team react?
In a software company a large number of simultaneously performed projects utilize the same groups of human and other resources. What is the term commonly used for this situation?
What does the acronym RAM commonly stand for in project management?
What is not handled as a constraint in project management?
A precontract agreement that establishes the intent of a party to buy products or services is called a :
What should not be part of a risk management plan?
A project manager performs Earned Value Analysis and finds the following results: EV: 250,000; PV: 200,000; AC 275,000 BAC is 500,000. What is right?
The construction of a residential home will cost a certain amount per square foot of living space. This is an example of what type of estimating?
Which of the following should not be reason for "rebaselining" in a project?
When a change control system`s provision for changes without formal review in case of emergency is being utilized :
Which of the following is generally not regarded to be a motivator according to Frederick Herzberg?
Companies and institutions commonly hire leaders with :
You are the project manager and have contracted with a service provider to develop a complicated software solution This software is necessary to control the machinery equipment which your project team will develop. It is a lump-sum contract with additional incentives for meeting predefined schedule targets. The payment schedule and incentives are as follows: 1. 10% with order 2. 20% after submission of prototype (+ 5% if delivered one week early) 3. 50% after product delivery (+ 5 % if delivered one week early) 4. 20% after final product acceptance (+ 5 % if delivered one week early) Yesterday the company submitted the prototype to your project team. This was 2 weeks after the scheduled delivery date and 3 weeks after the date necessary to qualify for the incentive payment. This morning, the manager of the contractor approached you to ask for changes to the payment schedule. They found that their initial work and costs were much higher than originally expected and they now wish to increase the second payment to 30% and reduce the final payment to 10%. During the discussion you got the impression that the company is in serious financial trouble. Which of the following might be the most appropriate initial step?
A review of management processes and the associated documentation is commonly called :
Which of the following is true in regard to the Code of Accounts?
You are a member of your company's project office. The company is running many concurrent projects; most of them share a resource pool. Understanding how resources are utilized across projects is seen as being essential to cost effectiveness and profitability. You recently received an inquiry to assess the benefits of using project management software to manage the company's project portfolio. Which of the following is true?
What are SMART objectives?
You have been assigned to a new project and have finished the scope statement. You and your team are now going to create a Work Breakdown Structure. You are spending a lot of time discussing how to create a completely decomposed Work Breakdown Structure. Which of the following is not relevant to this discussion?
A project manager performs Earned Value Analysis and finds the following results: AC: 220,000, PV: 250,000, EV: 220,000
During a company event, you had the opportunity to talk to a colleague project manager. He told you that in his current project actual costs are 15% under cumulated costs scheduled for today. What do you think?
Which is true regarding projects?
Which of the following statements describes the relationship between project phases and the project life cycle?
A project management team discusses what scope means in a project. All of the following statements are true except :
What is the S-curve in project management?
The output of the resource planning process is a document "resource requirements". This a description of what types of resources are required in what quantities... .
The major output document of Scope definition is the:
In regards of a cost baseline all of the following is true except :
Which is not true in regard of RoI (Return on Investment)?
Regarding Delphi Technique all of the following statements are true except :
Regarding quality and grade all of the following statements are true except :
Network templates which contain only portions of a network are often referred to as :
In making an investment in a project, investors require compensation for which of the following?
A summary activity in a network logic diagram is often referred to as a :
A Project Manager is most likely to have the strongest influence in an organization that is:
Project Management processes are:
Executing processes are concerned with:
Controlling processes are concerned with:
A complex project will fit best in what type of organization?
Core planning processes:
In a weak matrix organization, functional managers are usually responsible for:
As a Project Manager on replacing 2 miles of sewer pipe part of your job is to determine if there are changes to the scope of the project, the schedule, the budget and the technical requirements. These responsibilities are part of which process:
You are one of four full-time project managers in an organization. You all share an administrative person. There are generally 8-10 projects per year that involve about 25% of the organization's employees, however, these employees do not report to you. Your organization can best be classified as:
During the course of a project you have motivated team members, managed conflict, performed personnel administrative functions and negotiated for more resources. These are examples of:
You have been promoted to Manager, Continuous Process Improvement. Your new position:
Which of the following is not a Project Management knowledge area?
In a matrix organization, which of the following is not a responsibility of the project manager?
During the planning phase of your current project, you prepare a detailed financial plan. For this process, you are using:
You are responsible for the communication controls for the Genesis series of satellites. Your current assignment is:
Which of the following knowledge areas are part of Project Closure?
The process of determining who needs what information, when they need it, and how it will be given to them is:
Communication planning is most tightly linked with what process:
Which of the following is not a technology factor that may affect the project communications plan:
Where is the bulk of the project budget spent?
Which of the following is not a type of performance reporting:
Which tool and technique integrates scope, cost and schedule in measuring project performance?
Inputs to Administrative Closure include all of the following except:
Which equation correctly illustrates the cost variance of a project, in currency?
At 40% through your project you have a BCWS of $68,000 and a BCWP of $62,000. Your project is:
In preparing for a team meeting you want to let the team know how they are doing on the project schedule over all. You calculate the task achievements as follows: planning has a BCWS of $20,000 and a BCWP of $25,000, testing has a BCWS of $17,000 and BCWP of $15,000, and design has a BCWS of $34,000 and a BCWP of $42,000. As a whole your project is:
In order to let the project sponsor know the percentage of cost variance of your project, you calculate:
As the project manager, you chair a weekly exchange of information meeting among team leaders. This is an example of communication that is:
Manual filing systems, electronic text databases, and project management software that allow team members to share information about the project are examples of:
During project team formation and during the early phases of a project, the most common source of conflict within the project team is likely to be:
During execution of a project, the most common source of conflict within the project team is likely to be:
During execution of your project plan, you discover that a task team is unaware that deliverables from another task will be late, holding up their own progress. As a result you should:
In assigning your new project to you, the program manager tells you that this is a very high visibility project and that executive management will be following your progress very closely with particular interest in use of the pyrotechnics that will be involved. This information is valuable input for your:
The Communication Management Plan provides all of the following except:
Life-Cycle Costing is:
The two phases used in Project Cost Management are:
Determining what resources and quantities will be used for the project is part of:
The Scope Statement is used in which process
Inputs into Resource Planning include:
The term resource planning refers to:
Cost estimating includes all of the following except:
Cost Estimating is most closely linked with which other process?
Parametric Modeling and Analogous Estimating are used in what process:
You are building the budget for your project. You don't have detailed requirements for the project yet. However, a fellow project manager completed a similar project a year ago, and has his budget assumptions and final costs documented. You decide to use this information as the basis of your cost estimating. This is called:
As the Project Cost Engineer on a high rise development you are preparing your budget. You have developed a template, based on similar projects that can be used for buildings with 3-25 stories. It breaks out cost per square foot for plumbing, wiring, HVAC, dry wall, floors etc. This type of cost estimating is called:
Before you begin the cost budgeting process for building a new school you should make sure your cost engineer has given you:
You are the program manager for a new commercial jet. A new robotic technology has just emerged that will improve the accuracy of machining connectors to within 3 microns. This technology will also result in a savings from the previous method. As a result of this, all program managers are being asked to come up with a new estimate at completion for their in-process projects. The most accurate method to develop the new estimate is to:
Which of the following is not an input to cost budgeting?
Which of the following is not an input to the cost control process?
Which of the following is not an output of the cost control process?
As project manager, which of the following activities most deserves your immediate attention?
At what stage in the project life cycle would costs be the lowest?
At what point in the project would stakeholders have the most ability to influence the final outputs of the project product?
At what point in the project is there the most risk of project failure?
Phase exits, kill points and stage gates are used for what purpose?
Which knowledge area involves organizational theory as a tool/technique?
Human Resource Management is tightly linked to which other knowledge area?
Which of the following is not considered a constraint in Organizational Planning?
Outputs from Organizational Planning include all of the following except:
Inputs to Staff Acquisition include all of the following except:
Which of the following is not an input to Team Development?
Cost Budgeting is defined as:
The cost baseline is an output of what process?
The time phased budget that is used to measure and monitor cost performance is:
Which knowledge area does not provide input into cost budgeting?
At the beginning of a project you are asked for an order of magnitude budget. What type of budget estimate are you likely to use?
The major process groups of project management are:
Project Stakeholder are:
The Project Life Cycle:
In planning your resources for a new building project you are working with an engineering firm, a construction management firm and a general contractor. You are mindful that the general contractor will have to manage several sub-contractors over the next 9 months and that the structural and civil engineers will need to communicate frequently. You must select the best reporting relationships among the parties. This is an example of:
As a Project Manager you have just completed a 9-month project where you had accountability for the schedule, budget, team members and quality of the end product. You are up for your annual review and expect a bonus based on your performance. What is not an area that you would expect to be rewarded for?
You have inherited a project that is in trouble. The team members are spread out in 5 states, the schedule is behind by 20%, the former project manager alienated the team and there is no communication plan. The first issue you must work on is building a cohesive team to get the project back on track. Which of the following is not a technique that you would use in team development:
You have had your Scope Definition approved and are working on your budget and schedule. In order to estimate the labor costs and the schedule you need to know who your team members are, and what their skill level is. You consult your staffing management plan and your staffing pool description. By following the recruitment practices and working with the procurement department to negotiate for various external contractors you are able to complete a project directory. All these are steps in what process?
The primary communication skills you will use in working with functional managers will be:
The primary communication skills you will use in working with external stakeholders will be:
According to
According to C. P. Alderfer, people's needs fall into three broad categories. Which of the following is not one of Alderfer's categories?
Which of the following is not a consideration in selecting project staff members?
Which of the following is not a method for acquiring team members?
All of the following are components of Project Integration Management except:
Which of the following is not an example of project integration management:
The project plan is used to do all of the following except:
Which of the following is not an input into Project Plan Development:
Which of the following is not true about project planning methodology?
A project plan generally includes the following:
All of the following are true about Project Plan Execution except:
Inputs to overall change control include:
Configuration Management, Performance Measurement and Project Management Information Systems are all:
As a project manager on a software development project you are accountable for maintaining the integrity of the performance measurement baselines. This includes making sure that approved changes to the schedule and cost are reflected in the project plan. However, you also make sure that only changes to the project scope affect the performance measurement baselines. This is an example of:
You are a PM at a pharmaceutical company. You are the project manager in charge of the development of a new drug that will reduce the after effects of chemo-therapy. What is an assumption that you might have as part of your project plan?
You are considering outsourcing some of the work on your project. Doing this will reduce the amount of time it takes to complete the milestone, and it will increase the budget. You should document your decision and the reasons for it in:
You have just been given a new project and are creating the project plan. You are reviewing team member planning assumptions, information from similar projects and the identified constraints and assumptions. What tools will you utilize in order to complete the project plan?
At appropriate times during your project, you issue task orders that describe what work is to be done, who is to do it, and when it is to be done. This is an example of:
The organizational design of a project is critical to its successful management. Which of the following is not one of the three basic factors influencing decisions about the design of a project organization ?
The degree to which written policies, procedures, rules, and job descriptions guide the behavior of personnel involved in projects is called:
Which of the following is not an organizational policy consideration in formulating a project plan?
Which of the following is not a tool or technique for overall change control?
Inputs to overall change control include all of the following except:
A work authorization system is:
Which is not a tool or technique for project plan execution
All of the following are true of Administrative Closure except:
Meredith & Mantel describe four varieties of project termination which include : all of the following except by Extinction
Your new product development project has resulted in a highly successful new product. The property, equipment, materials, and personnel of your project are now being integrated into the functional organization. Your project is being terminated by:
Your project multiple functions. If this decision is made, your project will be terminated by: to create a new time tracking and accounting system has been put on hold pending a decision to bring in a third party human resources system that will handle
As the most recent in a succession of project managers assigned to the project, you discover that one of your projects has no people assigned to it, no deliverables scheduled for development, and an extremely small budget. Nevertheless, you are expected to report status for the project periodically. This project has, in fact, experienced termination by:
Your new product development project has resulted in a highly successful new product. You find that you are being promoted to lead a new business unit to produce and market the product. Your project is being terminated by:
Valid reasons for considering termination of a project include all of the following except:
Project termination responsibilities include all of the following except:
Which equation correctly illustrates the cost variance of a project, in dollars?
The "To Complete Performance Index" (TCPI) is calculated by:
Under what knowledge area is the primary process area for carrying out the work of the project?
Which of the following is not true about Project Plan Development?
Coordinating a schedule, organizational policies, staffing plans and historical information about risk is an example of:
A factor that limits the project team?s options, such as a prescribed due date, is called a:
Those areas that a project manager considers to be true, real or certain are called:
You are a new project manager at a utility. In working on your first project you are referring to the project templates, company glossary, ABT Workbench Manual, and archives from previous projects. These tools are helping you with:
As a project manager on a major construction project you spend some time informally interviewing contractors, team members, engineers and even some of the city permit people. You want to make sure you have all your bases covered in the planning process. This is an example of:
Project files, project software, and shared folders are examples of:
A collection of documents that will change over time as more information becomes available is called:
A management control that rarely changes, and then only in response to defined criteria, such as a change in scope is called a:
Which of the following is not an appropriate reason to provide members of your project team with additional training?
Team development is undertaken to improve performance. Which of the following is not a way in which team development improves team performance?
As project manager, you prepare written input to the performance appraisals of functional personnel assigned to your project. This activity is a part of which human resources process?
In taking over a failing project you hold a status meeting and find that the IS department and the business operations representatives are avoiding each other. You realize that before moving on you need to do some team building. The type of behavior that the IS and operations people are demonstrating is:
In taking over a failing project you hold a status meeting where the marketing person and the finance person get into a heated discussion, each trying to push their viewpoint on the other without listening. You realize that before moving on you need to do some conflict resolution. The type of behavior that the marketing and finance people are demonstrating is:
Which of the following models of conflict resolution allows a cooling off period, but seldom resolves the issue in the long term?
Which method of conflict resolution tends to increase conflict rather than resolve it?
Which method of conflict resolution tends to be the most effective in resolving conflicts?
Which conflict resolution style emphasizes agreement rather than focusing on areas of disagreement?
All of the following are common uses for a "War Room" except:
Stock options, assigned parking spaces and a company car are all examples of what?
Project Procurement Management has the following processes:
Which of the following is not an input into procurement planning?
Which of the following is not an input into solicitation planning
A make or buy analysis is used as:
What document contains the following: type of contract to be used, vendor management protocols, procurement coordination?
Obtaining information from prospective sellers on how project needs can be met is part of:
Techniques for Source Selection include all of the following except:
Contract administration integrates many of the other knowledge areas. All of the following are part of contract administration except:
Which of the following is not a typical reason for authorizing a project:
Outputs from the Initiation process include:
All of the following are generally true about a Project Charter except:
The Scope Statement incorporates all of the following except:
Scope definition is important to the success of the project except:
Product documentation is input to what process
You are about 30% through a project. In reviewing the product requirements you realize that one of the product functionalities has been omitted in the project plan. At this point you:
During the schedule development process the Project Manager may have to go through several iterations of the schedule before establishing the schedule baseline. Which of the following are tools and techniques that may be used during this process?
Your company has just received approval to purchase a company that offers complementary services to your company. They have assigned you as the project manager for the acquisition. The CFO has handed you a Project Charter that describes how this acquisition will improve penetration and open up a new distribution channel for your company's products. She has also given you authority to apply organizational resources to project activities. You are anxious and excited as you head back to your office to organize your thoughts and begin the planning process. Using the Project Charter you define the deliverables and the objectives. The output from this process is the:
Scoring models, comparative approaches and benefit contribution are all part of:
Your company has just received approval to purchase a company that offers complementary services to your company. As PM on the acquisition, you develop a deliverable-oriented grouping of project elements that organizes and defines the total scope of the project. This output is called:
Scope verification is a part of:
Which of the following is not an output of scope change control?
Which of the following is an input of scope change control?
The marketing department has just discovered that most buyers are not willing to pay the extra cost of one of the features planned in your current project. They submit a change request that is a result of:
The marketing department has just discovered that a competitor is offering a new feature, using a new technology, on a product similar to the one being created by your project. They submit a change request that is the result of:
The engineering department has just reported that a small plastic insert can be used as an acceptable substitute for an expensive molybdenum bearing in the warp drive you are creating. They submit a change request that is the result of:
The engineering department has raised a question about the expensive molybdenum bearing you plan to use in your warp drive project. They believe they can find an acceptable but cheaper substitute and submit a change request to do the necessary research. Their request is the result of:
Who originates the Project Charter?
Which is true about a work breakdown structure?
Scope verification is concerned with:
The document that describes the project's scope baseline is:
The two closing procedures are called:
A work package is:
A scope change is:
Overall change control requires all of the following except:
Overall change control is concerned with all of the following except:
Which of the following is not an input to overall change control?
Your current project has over 200 specs, 350 engineering drawings and 5500 parts. What tool do you use to apply technical and administrative direction to identify the functional and physical characteristics of items, and control changes to those characteristics?
Configuration management does all of the following except:
At the outset of a project you should define the processes necessary to account for change. Which of the following is not a standard inclusion in a change control system?
Which of the following is not a type of baseline from which to measure change?
There are three outputs that are common to scope, schedule and cost control processes. Which of the following is not a common output to these control processes?
Performance reports are an input to overall change control. Which of the following statements is not necessarily true about performance reports?
You are continually faced with tasks coming in late because your resources are being pulled off to handle other "urgent" situatins. You have set up a conference with several of the managers who have been doing this on a regular basis. What technique might you use to alleviate the current situation?
In a team meeting, two of the managers start a discussion that escalates into an argument. In order to restore peace to the meeting you point out the part of the conflict that they both agree to and using friendly tones try to defuse the current situation. This is an example of what type of conflict management?
A WBS provides a framework from which all of the following can be done except:
Part of being a project manager involves dealing with conflict. According to John Adams, Ph.D., there are five methods for dealing with conflict. Some of them are used for temporary fixes, some provide more permanent resolutions. Which of the following is used for temporary resolution?
A Work Breakdown Structure provides a framework from which all of the following can be done except:
Which of the following is least likely to be a source of conflict in a matrix environment?
Which of the following is not provided by the framework of a Work Breakdown structure?
According to James P. Lewis, which of the following is not provided by the framework of a Work Breakdown structure?
As a project manager in a project organization you are constantly dealing with conditions that breed conflict as you execute your project. Which of the following is not a condition of conflict in a project organization?
You are in the implementation phase of a project. At this point, which of the following is the lowest source of conflict for you?
According to John R. Adams Ph.D., there are five sources of power that people have: legitimate, coercive, reward, expert and referent. If the team knows that the project manager who is managing the project is reporting straight up to the President, what type of power is most prevalent?
Two weeks ago the project manager was fired for not managing the project well. The project is behind schedule, over cost and the morale on the team is very low. The new project manager is having a team meeting. She starts out by telling the team about the last three projects she worked on, how they were similar to this one and how she brought them in ahead of schedule and on budget. What type of power is she establishing?
The BCWP is 65%, the BCWS is 70%. The project manager wants to make up for the 5%. The project sponsor has set aside $5000 as a reserve to remedy this situation. Instead of using it to hire temporary labor, or pay overtime, the project manager is using it as an incentive for the team to catch up in 60 days. If they do, the money will be used to take the team members and their guests to Catalina for an all expenses paid weekend. What type of power is the project manager referencing?
Project execution is very much an integrative process whereby all the work that was planned is actually accomplished. During this integrative process, what is the area that the project manager will spend the least amount of time on?
The CFO wants to know how the project is going. You put together a presentation that shows the milestones, progress to date against schedule and budget, and projected progress in the next 30 days. What type of power does this demonstrate to senior management?
What two main knowledge areas are not listed in the execution process of the project, but rather a part of the controlling process?
Coordinating changes across knowledge areas is a function of:
Making need information available to project stakeholders in a timely manner is called:
A vendor has notified you that a shipment will be 3 weeks late. This will also delay the manufacturing of several other items. Recognizing that you will need to make some changes to the project, what is your next step?
In communication, which of the following is not a responsibility of the sender?
As a software development manager in a boutique software shop that sells custom solutions, you have designed a system that helps you control change. This system identifies the version number of releases, identifies any unique code, and has records of all the different variations and who the customer is. This system is formally known as:
A set of manual files made available to all team members is called:
In reviewing your earned value reports you notice that your application integration testing is moving along 20% ahead of schedule. You realize that you can have them test some of the enhancements, thereby improving the quality of the product, while staying on schedule and within budget. This is an example of:
An ad hoc group that discusses variances to the baselines, a documented process to manage variances, and procedures to update documents are all part of:
Which of the following is an input to the information distribution process?
The customer has decided that he wants blue walls instead of gray. You have not painted the walls yet. What should you do?
"A Project Manager is at the project kick-off meeting. He confidently states the vision and mission for the project. This PM is exhibiting the following leadership style:
You are in charge of developing a new product for a bank. Your quality metrics are based on the 80th percentile of each of the last three products developed. This is an example of:
During the schedule development process the Project Manager may have to go through several iterations of the schedule before establishing the schedule baseline. All of the following are tools and techniques that may be used during this process:
Which of the following could be an appropriate WBS code for a work package at the fourth level in a WBS where the top level code is 1.0?
Which of the following Project Scope Management processes involves subdividing the major project deliverables into smaller, more manageable components?
The review of key deliverables and project performance at the conclusion of a project phase is called:
Which of the following is a common characteristic of most project life cycle descriptions?
Project scope is:
What is the purpose of the WBS?
The unique identifiers assigned to each item of a WBS are often known collectively as:
Change requests can occur due to:
What is the difference between scope verification and quality control?
Which of the following are outputs of the Scope Verification Process?
Which of the following are outputs of the Scope Change Control Process?
Who should contribute to the development of the project plan?
A project plan is:
Which of the following tools and techniques are commonly used in the Scope Definition Process?
Which of the following is NOT an example of a type of schedule report?
What is the primary purpose of a milestone chart?
When should the project manager be assigned?
In which type of organization(s) is the project manager's role most likely part-time?
A document which describes how project scope will be managed and how scope changes will be integrated into the project is: (choose the best answer)
Which of the following statements concerning a scope statement are true?
During what Time Management Process are the specific activities that must be performed to produce the deliverables in the WBS identified and documented?
A period of time in work weeks which includes non-working days is called:
The amount of time that an activity can be delayed from its early start without delaying the project end date is called:
What are you likely to see as a project progresses in a schedule with must fix dates and little or no slack?
Given the following estimates: Optimistic 3 days, Pessimistic 9 days, and most likely 6 days, what is the PERT weighted average?
What is the standard deviation for the estimates in the above problem?
In crashing the schedule, you would focus on:
To calculate the late start and late finish dates for a set of tasks, you must do:
An activity that consumes no time or resources and shows only that a dependency exists between two activities is called:
A modification of a logical relationship that allows an acceleration of the successor task is represented by:
Assuming a PERT weighted average computation, what is the probability of completing the project within plus-or-minus 3 standard deviations of the mean?
Schedule variance can be determined by:
What is critical path?
The Time Management Process that involves identifying and documenting interactivity dependencies is called: 48. Activity Definition 49. Activity Duration Estimating 50. Activity Dependencies 51. Activity Sequencing 43. A network diagram that uses nodes to represent activities and arrows to show the activity dependencies and allows no loops is called:
Project Cost Management includes all of the following except:
Which of the following choices indicates that a project has a burn rate of 1.2? Hint: Burn rate is the same as the Cost Performance Index
The inputs to Cost Budgeting includes all of the following except:
During the six month update on a 1 year, $50,000 project, the analysis shows that the BCWS is $25,000; the BCWP is $20,000 and the ACWP is $15,000. What can be determined from these figures?
Earned value is:
Which of the following Cost Management processes are concerned with cost baseline?
Cost control is concerned with:
Which of the following statements concerning bottom-up estimating is true?
Percent complete is calculated by:
Life cycle costing:
Analogous estimating:
Estimated at Completion is determined by:
Parametric cost estimating involves:
A cost management plan is:
Cost estimating:
Which of the following inputs belongs to Resource Planning?
Which task is most over budget?
Which task is ahead of schedule and under cost?
Which task is on schedule with a cost variance of $0?
Which task has the greatest schedule variance?
The process of evaluating overall project performance on a regular basis to provide confidence that the project will satisfy the relevant quality standards is called:
The process of monitoring specific project results to determine if they comply with relevant quality standards is called:
A histogram ordered by frequency of occurrence that shows how many results were generated by each identified cause is:
Tools and techniques used during the Quality Planning process include:
The overall intentions and direction of an organization with regard to quality as formally expressed by top management is a:
CIP is:
The practice of ceasing mass inspections and ending awards based on price is credited to:
Quality is:
The concept of making a giant leap forward followed by a period of maturity is:
The concept that it is easier and less costly to do the work right the first time is called:
The ability of a product to be used for different purposes at different capacities and under different conditions determines its:
Which of the following is not considered a cost of nonconformance to quality?
Cost of quality includes:
What percentage of sales is estimated to be the cost of non-quality?
A series of consecutive points on the same side of the average is called:
Which of the following statements concerning acceptance sampling is false?
80% of the problems are found in 20% of the work is a concept of:
A structured tool, usually industry or activity specific, used to verify that a set of required steps has been performed is called:
A tool that analyzes the inputs to a process to identify the causes of errors is called:
The concept of zero inventory is called:
The project manager's leadership style should be matched to the corresponding developmental level of the project team and should move through successive steps in the following order:
Human resource administration is the primary responsibility of the:
A mandatory prerequisite for team building is:
Which of the following is best for handling cross-functional project needs for a large, complex project?
Collocation can mean:
A key barrier to team development is:
Which of the following are examples of project-based organizations?
Legitimate power is:
What impact does a matrix organization have on project team development?
Which of the following is not a process of project human resource management?
A technique for resolving conflict in which the parties agree to have a neutral third party hear the dispute and make a decision is called:
Which of the following is not an input into organizational planning?
Forcing, as a means to manage conflict:
When should the project expeditor form of organization be used?
The belief that management's high levels of trust, confidence and commitment to workers leads to high levels of motivation and productivity on the part of workers is a part of which motivation theory?
Which of the following is part of the expectency theory of motivation?
Which of the following statements concerning compromise as a conflict resolution is false?
In which type of organization is team building likely to be most difficult?
A document or tool which describes when and how human resources will be brought onto and taken off the project team is called a:
A tool which links the project roles and responsibilities to the project scope definition is called:
Which of the following is not a process of Project Communcations Management?
Which of the following are outputs from the Communications Planning process?
The receiver filters messages based on all but the following:
How much time does the typical project manager spend communicating both formally and informally?
In communications management, to assimilate through the mind or senses is the process of:
The sending or conveying of information from one place to another is the process of:
Group brainstorming encourages all of the following except:
The three major types of communication are:
All of the following are outputs from performance reporting EXCEPT:
All of the following aid in achieving consensus EXCEPT:
All of the following are communication tools EXCEPT:
Communication is the PRIME responsibility of a Project:
A tight matrix is:
The sender is responsible for:
What are the four parts of the communications model?
A leadership style in which the project manager shares problems with team members and formulates solutions as a group is called:
In negotiating with functional department managers, project managers often find themselves using what two-party conflict management approach?
A type of organization in which the project manager has little formal authority and basically acts as a staff assistant to an executive who is ultimately responsible for the project is called:
Formal acceptance by the client or sponsor of the project should be preapred and distributed during which process?
In which of the following organizations is the project manager role likely to be parttime?
Project Risk Management includes all of the following processes except:
Using the PMBOK definition of contingency reserve, which of the following statements about contingency reserves is false?
Which of the following is not a tool or technique used during the Risk Quantification Process?
Which of the following is true about pure risk?
A contingency plan is:
The normal risk of doing business that carries opportunities for both gain and loss is called:
A risk response which involves eliminating a threat is called:
Deflection or transfer of a risk to another party is part of which of the following risk response categories?
When should risk identification be performed? (select best answer)
Which of the following statements is false?
A contingency plan is executed when:
Management reserves are used to handle which type of risk?
Which of the following techniques accounts for path convergence and generally estimates project durations more accurately?
Most schedule simulations are based on some form of which of the following?
When should a risk be avoided?
If a project has an 80% chance of having the scope defined by a certain date and a 70% chance of obtaining approval for the scope by a certain date, what is the probability of both events occurring?
The independence of two events in which the occurrence of one is not related to the occurrence of the other is called:
The one document that should always be used to help identify risk is the:
Risks are accepted when:
An example of risk mitigation is:
A unilateral contract under which the seller is paid a preset amount per unit of service is called:
Which of the following is considered during the Procurement Planning Process?
From a buyer's standpoint, which of the following is true?
Which of the following processes involves obtaining information (bids and proposals) from prospective sellers?
Which of the following is true about procurement documents?
Which of the following is a method for quantifying qualitative data in order to minimize the effect of personal prejudice on source selection?
Which of the following is true concerning evaluation criteria?
Which of the following are inputs to the Source Selection Process?
A significant difference between independent estimates and proposed pricing could mean that:
Which of the following are examples of indirect costs?
Which of the following contract types places the greatest risk on the seller?
In which of the following contract types is the seller's profit limited?
A cost-plus-percentage-cost (CPPC) contract has an estimated cost of $120,000 with an agreed profit of 10% of the costs. The actual cost of the project is $130,000. What is the total reimbursement to the seller?
A cost-plus-incentive-fee (CPIF) contract has an estimated cost of $150,000 with a predetermined fee of $15,000 and a share ratio of 80/20. The actual costs of the project is $130,000. How much profit does the seller make?
A fixed-price-plus-incentive-fee (FPI) contract has a target cost of $130,000, a target profit of $15,000, a target price of $145,000, a ceiling price of $160,000, and a share ratio of 80/20. The actual cost of the project was $150,000. How much profit does the seller make?
Under what circumstances is it better for a contractor to subcontract?
Which type of bilateral contract is used for high dollar, standard items?
Which of the following are characteristics of a purchase order?
In which stage of the negotiation meeting are points of concession identified?
Which type of warranty is enacted if a service or product does not meet the level of quality specified in the contract?
The budget for a major project lasting several years is usually prepared to reflect expenditures on an annual basis. The budget is, therefore, compared to expenditures at the end of each accounting cycle (i.e., each year). This poses a potential problem because _________.
Which of the following is NOT a method of government procurement?
The "rule of seven" as applied to process control charts means that
There is project with CPI of 0.81 and TCPI=1.00001 this project is
As part of the quality audit, the scope statement is checked against the work results to ensure the conformance to the customer requirements. The results should be documented and used for:
The quality team for the project consists of several groups. Which of the following project participants plays the most important role in the quality function?
In order to anticipate your management's approval of the amount of risk you plan to take on with your chosen project approach, you would use
Scope planning is:
Completion of the _____________ scope is measured against the plan.
Project initiation is all of the following except:
Decision models used in project initiation include:
A work breakdown structure is a:
The items at the lowest level of the WBS are called
All of the following statements about the project charter are correct except:
Maintenance should:
Projects are typically authorized as a result of any of the following except
A scope change control system
The major project scope management processes include:
The work that must be done in order to deliver a product with the specified features and functions is:
The ___________ documents the characteristics of the product or service that the project was undertaken to create.
An input to the scope change control process is:
The project manager should be assigned ___________ as an output from the Initiation process:
Developing a written scope statement as the basis for future project decisions is called:
Techniques for conducting product analysis include:
Scope planning includes alternatives identification, which can be conducted by the common technique of:
A scope management plan describes:
Decomposition is
A project management professional can compare earned value performance data to all of the following project management tools EXCEPT:
You are the controller on your project. Your project manager has requested that you provide him with a forecast of project costs for the next 12 months. He needs this information to determine if the budget should be increased or decreased on this major construction project. In addition to the usual information sources, which of the following should you also consider?
Earned value should be used to estimate final project costs because it.
"The seller delivers a fixed price plus incentive fee project at a cost of $90,000. The terms of the contract are a ceiling price of $120,000, a target cost of $ 100,000, a target profit of $10,000, and a target price of $110,000. The share ratio is 70/30. The final price(your total reimbursement) is:
The party that needs the change resulting from the project, and who will be its custodian on completion is the
The core planning processes include:
In project communications, the sender is responsible for:
Over the life cycle of the project, the quality of information:
The most important criteria in selecting project selection method is:
What is Team Development?
3 major processes in Project HRM
The seller delivers a fixed price plus incentive fee project at a cost of $90,000. The terms of the contract are a ceiling price of $120,000, a target cost of $ 100,000, a target profit of $10,000, and a target price of $110,000. The share ratio is 70/30. The final price (your total reimbursement) is:
A project is defined as:
A program is:
Project management processes can be organized into:
_____________ involve(s) coordinating people and other resources to carry out the plan
___________ must be measured regularly to identify variance from the plan.
Critical input to scope initiation is:
Projects are initiated in response of:
The scope statement should include:
A project kick off meeting is usually conducted to:
A WBS should be developed to cover
The WBS usually:
1. Which of the following methods is least likely to be used for explaining project planning guidelines to the team?
Which of the following is least likely to be used in explaining to a team member why you consider her/his performance substandard?
Which of the following is not one of Crosby's Four Absolutes of Quality?
Which of the following is not a strong acquisition tool?
Which of the following is not an external-unpredictable risk?
The delphi Method is best suited for:
Standardization of purchased material:
The sum of the products and services to be provided as a project is called:
Maslow ranked Human needs from the highest to lowest
You are faced with two very important decision in your life. What is the better decision financially?
Your project is in the final test stage, the user acceptance test. It meets all the product specs and is under planned costs. In term of schedule, this project is ahead. Your customer meets you and requested that he will not accept the product unless you make several changes. What you should do is:
To make an informed decision about buying insurance, the project manager needs to determine the ratio of insurance cost and the expected value of the loss. For example, if the cost of insurance is $10,000, the value of the property is $200,000, and the probability of loss is 0.05 (or five percent), the insurance is ________.
The single point standard deviations are 3, 5, 10 and 3 for the critical path. What is the standard deviation for the entire path? 232. Which of the following statements concerning contract type is correct?
Herzberg identified factors, which, if present, will lead to increased motivation. A typical factor would be:
Your customer ask for a small change in the project, which was not budgetted in the project. It is a small effort as compared to the total project and you need the goodwill for a multimillion dollar on the pipeline. You will
You are responsible for ensuring that your seller's performance meets contractual requirements. For effective contract administration, you should
The three major causes of change on a project are
The purpose of the review of deliverables and project performance at the conclusion of a project phase is to
The budget for a major project lasting several years is usually prepared to reflect expenditures on an annual basis. The budget is, therefore, compared to expenditures at the end of each accounting cycle (i.e., each year). This poses a potential problem because _________ .
A contractor is working on a fixed price contract that calls for a single, lump sum payment upon satisfactory completion of the contract. About halfway through the contract, the contractor project manager informs their contract administrator that financial problems are making it difficult for them to pay their employees and subcontractors. The contractor asks for a partial payment for work accomplished. Which of the following actions by the buyer is most likely to cause problems for the project?
Using the situation below and assuming continued efficiency for work-in progress and fixed price contract for task four. The estimate at completion is: Budgeted Cost BCWS ACWP BCWP Task One $5K $5K $6K $5K Task Two $6K $6K $8K $4K Task Three $4K $2K $1K $1K Task Four $4K $0K $0K $0K
C (PMBOK 8.2.2.1 & 8.1.2.1) 3. B (PMBOK 12.6 and 10.4) 4. B (PMBOK 5.1.2.1) 5. C (PMBOK 6.4.2) 6. B (Principles of PM, page 162) 7. B (Earned Value Project Management, page 138) 8. C (PMBOK 2.3.1) 9. E 10. D 11. E (PMBOK, Page 11) 12. A (PMBOK, Page 12) 13. A (PMBOK, Page 47 and Glossary definition for Scope) 14. B (Definition of "A" is OBS, See PMBOK, Page 56) 15. C 16. E (PMBOK, Page 57) 17. D (PMBOK, Page 56) 18. C ("D" is an output of Scope Control Process) 19. D (PMBOK, Page 57) 20. B 21. A 22. E (PMBOK, Page 48) 23. C (ESI Challenge!, Question 18) 24. C 25. D 26. E 27. C 28. A 29. B 30. A 31. E (Free float is the amount of time an activity can be delayed without affecting the start time of the succeeding activity) 32. C 33. A 34. E 35. C 36. C 37. C (ESI Questions, Question 23) 38. E 39. B (Lewis, Page 181) 40. D 41. E 42. D 43. B 44. A 45. B (CPI=BCWP/ACWP=1.2, This means, for every dollar spent, the project is achiving $1.2 of values) 46. B (Cost baseline is an output of Cost Budgeting) 47. D 48. E 49. D (Cost baseline is an output of Cost Budgeting and an input to Cost Control) 50. D 51. E 52. C (Option A is percent spent) 53. A 54. E 55. D 56. B 57. A 58. E 59. E 60. B 61. D 62. C 63. B 64. A 65. B 66, D 67. D 68. C 69. E 70. A 71. D (Option B is from CII Publication 10-2, Option C is from ISO 8402) 72. A 73. C 74. B 75. D 76. E 77. B 78. A 79. E 80. D 81. B 82. E 83. C 84. D 85. B 86. C 87. A 88. D 89. C 90. E (Project-base organizations fall into 2 categories: organizations that derive their revenue primarily from performing projects for others and organizations that use a management by projects approach -meaning that they typically have management systems such as financial, accounting, tracking, and reporting specifically designed to support project management. PMBOK, Page 17 ) 91. A (See Adams, "Principles of Project Management", Page 74 and Verma' s, "HR Skills for the PM", Page 23) 92. B (Complicates team development because team members are accountable to both their functional manager and the project manager) 93. C 94. B 95. A (Recruitment practices is an input of Staff Acquisition.) 96. A (Forcing establishes a win-lose situation) 97. B 98. B (Verma' s "HR Skills for the PM", Page 71-73) 99. C ("A" is part of Goal-Setting Theory" and "B" is part of the Contingency Theory) 100. D (A definitive resolution is achieved when a compromise is reached and accepted as a just solution by all parties in conflict) 101. C 102. A (The staffing management plan often includes resource histograms) 103. B 104. E 105. B 106. D (Assumes that the media used for distance communication is acceptable (fax or phone is operational) 107. D 108. A (Decoding is deciphering a message once assimilated) 109. B 110. C 111. A (Reference Vijay Verma' s, Human Resource Skills for the Project Manager, Page 18-21) 112. A (The outputs are change requests and performance reports. Stakeholder reports are examples of performance reports and B are examples of the formats for performance reports) 113. B (In the modern view, conflict is inevitable and is a natural result of change. If managed properly, conflict is frequently beneficial. Withdrawal tends to minimize conflict but also fails to resolve the issue) 114. E (Communication involves the exchange of information and implies a sender and a receiver) 115. D 116. B 117. A 118. B 119. C (Reference Verma, "HR skills for the PM", Page 218) 120. C 121. D 122. B 123. D 124. C 125. C 126. B 127. D 128. A (A workaround is an unplanned response to a negative risk event. Option C is the definition of contingency reserve) 129. D 130. C 131. A 132. D 133. B 134. B 135. A 136. C 137. D 138. B 139. D 140. C 141. B 142. E 143. E 144. C 145. E 146. A (Particularly if buyer wishes to exercise some degree of influence or control over subcontracting decisions) 147. D 148. E 149. A 150. E 151. D (Proposals is the other input. procurement documents are input into the Solicitation Process) 152. D 153. E 154. D 155. D 156. A (Is Implied) 157. B 158. A 159. E 160. C 161. B 162. D 163. C 164. No Answer 165. No Answer 166. No Answer 167. C (A is out. There is no indication of recovery, B is out per CPI, C is out since we can't determine the project stage, D is the answer) 168. C 169. A 170. D (Utility Theory from Wideman "Utility Theory, endeavors to formalize management attitude towards risk" "Techniques that take into account the attitude towards risk of the decision maker") 171. B (PMBOK Page 51-5.2) 172. A (PMBOK Page 47-5-Product Scope & Requirements, Project Scope & Plan) 173. D (PMBOK Page 49-5.1) 174. A (PMBOK Page 50-5.1.2.1) 175. B (PMBOK Page 54-5.3.3.1, Project Management, Kerzner Page 543-550) 176. C (PMBOK Page 56-5.3.5.1) 177. D (Project Management, Kerzner, Page 583) 178. C (Managing Projects in Organizations, Frame, Page 16) 179. B (PMBOK Page 49-5.1) 180. A (PMBOK Page 58-5.5.2.1) 181. B (PMBOK Page 47) 182. D (PMBOK Page 47) 183. C (PMBOK Page 49-5.1.1.1) 184. B (PMBOK Page 48Figure 5-1) 185. B (PMBOK Page 50-5.1.3.2) 186. D (PMBOK Page 51-5.2) 187. B (PMBOK Page 51-5.2.2.1) 188. A (PMBOK Page 51-5.2.2.3) 189. C (PMBOK Page 52-5.2.3.3) 190. B (PMBOK Page 53-5.3.2.2) 191. D 192. D (A change request is likely to have an impact on costs and may result in either an increase or a decrease in the project budget. PMI1996, Page 80 7.4.3.1) 193. A (The most commonly used method of performance measurement, earned value analysis integrates scope, cost, and schedule measures to assess project performance by calculating BCWS, ACWP, and BCWP for each activity. Fleming and Koppelman 1996,108; PMI(R) 1996,108 10.3.2.4) 194. D (Target profit is $10,000 Actual cost is $90,000 which is below the target of $100,000. The saving is $100,000-$90,000=$10,000. Share ratio is 70/30, which meant 70% for buyer and 30% for seller (when I answered this problem last month, I am not even aware of the real meaning), so this means that the seller get 30% of $10,000 or $3,000. The seller will now get $90,000 (actual cost) + $10,000 (target profit) + incentive of $3,000 => a total of $103,000. This is D) 195. B (Most Likely B. However the PMBOK is not definite on the difference between Sponsor, Client and Customer) 196. C (A is out Common planning is not core. B&D is out same reason. For this question we have to refer to Fig 3.5. Per the PMBOK 3.3.2 (last paragraph on page 30) core planning processes are: Scope Planning, Scope Definition, Activity Definition, Activity Sequencing, Activity Duration Estimating, Schedule Development, Resource Planning, Cost Estimating, Cost Budgeting, and Project Plan Development.) 197. A (10.2.2 PMBOK. Although A matches the PMBOK in verbage. The meaning of B has the essentially the same meaning as
A particular process has two independent sources of variation. The standard deviation of the first source is 3 units and the standard deviation of the second source is 4 units. The standard deviation of the processes is:
At XYZ Inc., the hourly wage for semi-skilled workers is $14.00. The annual audit shows that fringe benefits cost 30% of basic wages, and that overhead costs are 60% of wages plus fringe benefits. What is the loaded hourly wage for a semi-skilled worker at XYZ Inc.?
= -20,000) Since the Sharing Ratio is 80:20, the contractor has to bear 20% of the cost overrun; Seller's incentive = 20% * -20,000 = -4000. Since the contractor pays $4000, the Target Profit would be 15,000 4000 = 11,000. The contractor has to get Actual Cost + Profit = $1,50,000 + 11,000 = 1,61,000. Since there is a ceiling of 1,60,000, the contractor actually gets paid for only 1,60,000. Hence the total Profit would be Net Income Net expenditure (Cost) = 1,60,000 1,50,000 = 10,000. Hence the answer is A. 4. The budget for a major project lasting several years is usually prepared to reflect expenditures on an annual basis. The budget is, therefore, compared to expenditures
You are faced with two very important decisions in your life.
Your customer asks for a small change in the project, which was not budgeted in the project. It is a small effort as compared to the total project and you need the goodwill for a multimillion-dollar on the pipeline. You will
project charter 3. the organization strategic plan 4. message from sponsor
In WBS diagramming, the work package is:
A project is considered to be complete when
The earned value report BCWP at the end of the project
Which of the following organization holds the project manager's authority the weakest
Which of the following is or are a part of Solicitation process
If the message is very complex, the best method that can be used to have the greatest chance for the most complete understanding is
Which of the following is true about the WBS
The project schedule is not used to determine
A Gantt chart is useful in determining
The use of quality management tools is used to provide
Project coordination is enhanced through progress reporting, variance reporting, and cross-team meetings. These are all forms of:
As project manager, which of the following activities most deserves your immediate
Though, negative variance in A means BAD, and so apparently PM's attention should have gone to this case, but in case of D where the CV is positive (and you think that is good), you have the most significant variance, correct answer must be D. Since the question is "which of the following
This means, for every dollar spend on A, C and D, we so far got back $0.97(not bad), $1.07(good) and $1.25(Very good but?) respectively and for D, we completed 97%(not bad) of originally planned job. In case of D, the variance is the largest. The fact that it is under budget does not mean that the cause of the variance shouldn' t be investigated; either the execution is incomplete, or the plan was significantly off as a consequence of poor schedule. Either case probably requires some corrective action. Hence, a Project Manager's immediate
Scope verification is a part of
Your project will require use of a high-pressure punch press for four months. You can rent the press for $10,000 payable at the end of each month You may also choose to make a lump sum payment on the day the press is delivered. Using a discount rate of 1% per month, the maximum lump sum payment you should choose to make is:
A work package, scheduled for one year from today, will cost $114,000 at that time. It can be done now at a reduced cost. Using a 12% discount rate, the maximum cost you should authorize for doing the work now is:
Hence, the contractor gets Actual Cost + Target Profit + Incentive = $90,000 + $10,000 + $3,000 = $103,000 and answer is None of the Above (D). Note: this is also less than Ceiling Price ($120,000). 35. For the following group of numbers: 80, 10, 10, 50, 70 and 90. What is the standard deviation?
Optimistic 3 days, Pessimistic 9 days, and mostly likely 6 days. What is the standard deviation of this estimation? Method 1: PERT simplifies the calculation of Standard Deviation (SD) = [Pessimistic Estimate (TP) Optimistic Estimate (TO)] / 6 = (9 3) / 6 = 1 Method 2:
Using the data below, the point of total assumption occurs at a cost of work of:
A process characteristic has a true mean of 150 and a true standard deviation of 20. A sample of 25 items is taken from this process. The standard error of the estimate is:
That is C. 49. The future value of an annual income flow of $1000 for 2 years at 10% is:
A project manager believes that the best way to manage is to form a good, harmonious working relationship with the team, and high performance will follow. The project manager could be defined as a _____ manager.
You have summarized the project and note that 28,000 hours have been scheduled, 25,000 hours have been earned and 26,000 hours paid. The correct conclusion is:
The LEAST effective form of communication for complex situations is:
Electronic Company has a reliability of 0.90. 2 of these components arranged in series in a sub-assembly. The reliability for the sub-assembly is:
A particular process has 2 independent sources of variation. The standard deviation of the 1st source is 3 units & the standard deviation for the 2nd source is 4 units. The standard deviation of the process is:
For the following group of numbers, 80, 10, 10, 50, 70, and 90; what is the mode?
What the following mean in communication: Devil' s advocate
In negotiating with functional managers, project managers often find themselves using what two-party conflict management approach:
Deflection or transfer of risk to another party is part of which of the following risk response:
A Fixed Price plus Incentive fee (FPI) contract has a target cost of $1,30,000, a target profit of $15,000, a target price of $1,45,000, a ceiling price of $160,000, and share ration of 80/20. The actual cost of the project was $150,000. How much profit does the seller make?
Incentive
Profit Amount = Target Profit + Incentive Amount =
There is a project with CPI = 0.81 and TCPI = 1.00001; this project is:
Under budget 3. Over budget and early in its evolution 4. No inferences can be made.
You work as a senior project manager for a leading manufacturer of tennis racquets. Management wants to explore new markets and new products to boost revenue and profits. You are leading a team to identify potential products. Because of your background in exercise science you have you recommended developing a new type of tennis ball. But when you submitted the idea for review, executive management informed you that this product would not fit the organization's core competences. You need to go back to the drawing board ad recommend other products using management's guidelines as:
In which of the following scope management processes is the scope management plan prepared?
I guess there was an error in the answer choice. 65. What is the purpose of dummy actvity in an activityon-arrow diagram? (A) Show task that are not necessary (B) Show tasks that are alternatives to planned tasks (C) Show task dependency (D) Show task that is completed
A process characteristic has a true (population) mean of 150 & a true (population) Std Deviation of 20. A sample of 25 items is taken from this process. The Std Deviation for the sample is :-
So, the answer is C. or, StdDev of Sample = StdDev of Population / sqrt of samplpe size StdDev of Sample = 20/(sqrt of 25) StdDev of Sample = 4 67. A particular Process produces parts with Standard Deviation = 6 unit. Every 3 hrs, a sample of 4 items is taken & its mean is plotted. The Standard Deviation of the mean is
So answer is (B). When the question says std dev of mean, i assume that is just a typo either for "std dev of the sample" or "std dev from the mean" 68. A process has Critical path of 12 days & Standard Deviation of 1. What is the probability that the process will be completed in 13 days.
I' m hopelessly confused: per Rita Mulcahy, pg 138, the most often asked for formula for EAC is EAC=BAC/CPI, used when there are no variances from BAC, or when you expect to continue at same rate. She uses it for the exercise on pg 141, which definitely has a variance. Neither the PMBOK nor Heldman mention this formula, and recommend using EAC=AC+(BAC-EV)/CPI when you expect variances to continue. Please help me understand and for those who recently passed: which formula did you use if the question didn't specifically identify if variances are expected to continue. Thank you in advance; this forum is exceptionally helpful.
Using the PERT, the probability of completing a project at or later than its expected time is:
A company is making a decision regarding which model of equipment to buy for its next project. The equipment has a life of 4 years. Model E will have a cost of owning of $ 600 a month. The following info is available for model G. Purchase price is $ 20000. Operational cost is $1000 per year. Mean time between failures is 10 months. Damage per failure is $550 dollars. Which of the following is true?
PM cost = 28800/48 = 600. Model G: Total Cost = 20000 + 1000*4 + 550*48/10 = 26640. PM Cost = 26640/48 = 555, i.e., approximately $550. Answer is A. 72. Can anyone pinpoint the exact difference between Program vis-a-vis Project Portfolio -
A quality control (QC) manager for a manufacturing firm is calculating the expected standard deviation (s) for the length of hex bolts being produced on the assembly line. There are two sources of variation in the length of the hex bolts: production variation and measurement error. The QC manager knows that the standard deviations from these two sources are 0.24 inch and 0.43 inch, respectively.
The man-hours for project integration activities normally appear at which WBS level?
Define the following Risk types: Favorable Risk Opportunity Risk Pure Risk Business Risk Business Risk: Positive or Negative Risk, which you need to take for doing business. Like you may have the risk of loosing your investment money but also has the positive risk of getting profit. Pure Risk: This is only negative risk, which can be insurable. And without insurance it is very difficult to plan any suitable response strategy for this risk, like Fire, Flood, Accident, etc. Opportunity Risk: The risk that a better opportunity will present itself after an irreversible decision had been made. Favorable Risk: ??? [Favorable Risk and Opportunity Risk I am not sure but isn' t it obvious from the words "Opportunity" and "Favorable"] 77. Define the following Damage types: Compensatory Damages Punitive Damages Liquidated Damages Consequential Damages Compensatory Damages: damages intended to compensate the injured party for his or her loss. If you lose money because someone doesn' t keep his or her promise to you, the court makes that person pay you for your loss. Punitive Damages: damages intended to punish the wrongdoer. In general, punitive damages are awarded when the wrongdoer violates the law, as opposed to breaking a promise. Punitive damages would not be awarded for a breach of contract. Liquidated Damages: damages where the amount is specified in the contract, e.g. if the contract includes a clause that says if you don' t deliver on time, you will pay $50,000, those
Define with examples of attribute sampling and variable sampling.
In which process would you be most likely use variable [or attribute, for that matter] sampling?
For example, taking 50 bolts off the assembly line to check for defective threads. Or examine 50 out of a thousand lines of code at random to check for mistakes. When the product or service is examined, it will either exhibit the attribute being investigated or not. For example, it either has a mistake or doesn' t have a mistake. Dr. Deming's Red Bead Experiment was an example of attribute sampling. Volunteers from the workshop would dip a paddle with 50 depressions into a bunch of red and white beads. White beads were good, red beads represented defects. The results of these two types of sampling are usually plotted on a control chart. Control charts are also only used in 8.3 Quality Control, according to PMI. To summarize, I' ll write a couple more sample questions. 81. As part of your project team's quality control procedures, you have decided to measure the length of time it takes for your team to respond to participants who have questions concerning a pilot version of your new product. Because you
Your project team has created a new way to process claim forms. You want to know the percentage of claims that are now being paid within 10 days. To measure the number of claims that meet the 10-day goal vs. those that don't, which of these quality control techniques would you use?
Define and sequence following different stages of the Team Development:
Storming 3. Norming 4. Performing. The order is Forming --> Storming --> Norming --> Performing. The 4 stages of team development is called "Tuckman" model. The name is from Bruce Tuckman who wrote about this model in 1965. Forming: also called floundering this is the awkward time when a team just comes together and everyone is getting to know each other and each others role(s) on the project. It's time for getting acquainted. Storming: also called conflict at this stage teams begin to confront issues and other team members. Conflict over goals, priorities, roles can cause tension and disagreement. It's time of competitive tension. Norming: also called organized team is now demonstrating cohesiveness and cooperation to meet project objectives. At this stage, teams are better able to handle roadblocks because procedures are established and skills have been developed. It's time for developing procedures and policies. Performing: also called productive team is performing at a high level and there is mutual trust among the team members. Roles and procedures are accepted, understood and followed. It's now the effective team. 84. You are establishing a PMO for National Animal Celebrity Management program, which consists of 15 separate projects. The PMO will have a Project Management Information System. This system will be an on-line repository of all program data. You will collect descriptions of all work components for each of the 15 projects. This information will form an integral part of the:
All of the following are true regarding configuration management except:
All of the following are true regarding the Ishiwaka diagram in the quality planning process except:
Each of the following describes an element of the scope definition process except:
You have a choice of accepting a fixed price contract for $115,000 with a liquidated damages clause or $100,000 without the clause. There is a 60% chance your cost will be $90,000 and 40% chance your cost will be $80,000. There is a 98% chance of meeting your schedule but the penalty if missed is $50,000. Which is the best contract choice and how much profit would you make?
One outcome is that you will spend $90,000. Your profit will be $10,000. There is a 60% chance of this outcome occurring, so you get $10,000*0.6=$6,000. The other outcome is that you will spend $80,000. Your profit will be $20,000. There is a 40% chance of this outcome occurring, so you get $20,000*0.4=$8,000. If you add these two up, you get$14,000. If you decide to take the $100,000 contract, your "average" profit will be $14,000. For the contract with the clause, you get paid $115,000. If you will spend $90,000, your profit will be $25,000. There is a 60% chance of this outcome occurring, so you get $25,000*0.6=$15,000. If you spend $80,000, your profit will be $35,000. There is a 40% chance of this outcome occurring, so you get $35,000*0.4=$14,000. Since the problem doesn' t say otherwise, assume that no matter how much you spend, there is a 2% of missing the schedule. If you do, you pay $50,000. $50,000*0.02=$1,000. You will subtract this amount from the total, since this money would come out of your profit. If you add these
If you decide to take the $115,000 contract with the liquidated damages clause, your "average" profit will be $28,000. Correct answer is contract with clause, expected profit $28,000. 89. Some times, I get confused on the problems relating IRR and payback period. If I have
A payback period implies that the project is losing money, until the payback period is ended. In the absence of any other information, I would pick a project with a positive cash flow, a positive IRR, or a BCR > 1, over a project with any payback period. If you had more information, you would want to figure out or know the current value of the project over the life of the "product". This is Net Present Value; the project with the largest NPV wins. On the other hand, a project with a payback period will eventually break even. A project with a negative IRR, a BCR < 1.0, or a negative NPV, will always lose money. In this case the project with the payback period wins. 90. What do you understand of the different kinds of the Risk managers? Risk-mitigation Manager Risk-Averse Manager Risk-Seeking Manager Risk-Neutral Manager The attitude of a person towards risk is revealed by his or her utility function. The utility function is a graph with X-axis representing the amount of "money" a person has (for investment, say) and the Y-axis representing "utility" or how much that money is worth to us.
You plan to issue a purchase order (PO) to a supplier to provide services to the project. The contract is in place when:
Measuring the probability and consequences of risks is part of:
When there is uncertainty associated with one or more aspects of the project, one of the first steps to take is to:
One of the engineers on your team performs a presentation to a perspective client
When components in a system are arranged in parallel, system reliability be:
When components in a system are arranged in series, system reliability be:
An electronic component had a reliability of 0.90. Two of these components are
(Refer to item 96 above) 98. The project Manager determines that 100% inspection is required for the product. The best statement to describe this approach is:
What is acceptance Sampling. What are referred as consumer's and producer's risk?
Lot is actually good and is certified as good nobody's risk 2. Lot is actually bad and is certified as bad nobody's risk 3. Lot is actually bad, but is certified as good consumer' s risk 4. Lot is actually good, but is certified as bad producer' s risk 100. The specifications for a particular part are "10 +/-0.015". The associated process produce parts with a mean of 10 and a standard deviation of 0.002. The process capability index is:
A process characteristic has a true (population) mean of 150 and a true (population) standard deviation of 20. A sample of 25 items is taken from this process. The standard deviation of the sample is:
Can anyone explain what is the meaning of Tic Chart and what is the purpose of the same? It is called a Tic Sheet or a Check Sheet. The Check Sheet is used to keep track of the frequency with which certain things occur. For example, the number of times the machine broke down etc. Tally marks are used for keeping track of the occurrences.
The customer has negotiated a cost plus incentive fee contract with a vendor. The contract has a target cost of 300,000, a target fee of 40,000, a share ratio of 80/20, a maximum fee of 60,000, and a minimum fee of $10,000. If the seller has actual costs of 380,000, how much fee will the vendor collect?
At this point, the sellers fee is at the minimum of $10,000, and the seller will get this amount of profit no matter how much more over-budget the project goes. If the actual costs are less $200,000, the seller collects 20% of the $100,000 under budget, or $20,000 dollars. The fee will be at the maximum of $60,000, and the seller will get this fee no matter how much more under-budget the project goes.
A company is considering an investment of $80,000 at the present time. There is a 55% probability that the investment will perform well and a 45% probability that it will perform poorly. If the investment performs well, the payoff will be $200,000 one year from now. If it performs poorly, the project will be retired at no cost one year from now. Assuming a 10% discount rate, should the company make that investment?
So the expected value of success is 0.55 * 200,000 = 110,000. The Present Value of this at time 0 (NOW) at a discount rate of 10% is 110,000/(1.1)**1 =
Measuring the probability and consequences of risks is part of
Communication is the key to the success of a project. As the project manager, you have four stakeholders with whom you need to communicate. As such, you have six channels of communication. A new stakeholder has been added that you also need to communicate with. How many communication channels do you have now?
Project Managers need to resolve conflicts primarily with:
Which of the following questions is a functional Manager most likely to ask:
An individual who is still working on the satisfaction of physiological needs had essentially satisfied which needs:
Each Organization measures project team performance in its own way. However on which combination of the following objectives do most managers seem to agree?
The Project Manager's ability to influence others using power derived from the same source as Reward Power, is called:
In the PMP Exam Preparation book by ESI, page 5-9 I found the following sentence: "Monte Carlo analysis is considered a superior approach to analyzing the schedule when compared to PERT and CPM. This is true because PERT and CPM fail to
An RFP is issued during which step in the procurement process?
In which type of organization is team building likely to be most difficult.
There are hard causes of conflict (e.g. conflicting schedules) and soft causes. Soft causes are as important as hard causes. Soft causes include diversity of disciplinary expertise, __________ and the project manager's power of reward and punishment.
The Conflict resolution method that should be used when there is a high concern for personal goals and a high concern for relationships is:
Your client informs that his company has a problem with the current design specs of your product and how it will interface with the existing systems. If this occurs, it could be a major problem for your project. The client is coming to your office in one week to discuss the problem and to see what your team can do to overcome this setback. All previous meetings were informal with this client, but now he wants a formal meeting. What should you do to prepare for this meeting?
Listening involves more than hearing sounds. The good listener
Which of the following is associated with a buyer's request for material to meet a particular need:
What does letter of agreement include?
A project Manager is creating a Risk Management Plan. What step of Risk Management is Project Manager in?
Constructive team roles include:
Initiator lets do this 2. Information seeker don' t we have better information? 3. Information giver My experience has been that... 4. Encourager Mary, that was very helpful 5. Clarifiers I believe we are saying that.... 6. Gate Keeper We have not heard Mary' s opinion on this issue yet. What do you think, Mary? 7. Harmonizer I believe that we are all saying the same thing 8. Summarizer I feel that we can now reach an agreement
Aggressor criticizes and attempts to deflate other 2. Blocker does not want to listen to what other people say 3. Withdrawer is withdrawn 4. Recognition seeker sole purpose is to attract attention and gain recognition 5. Topic jumper jumps topics 6. Dominator dominates the discussion 7. Devil' s advocate always pokes hole in other' s logic
A lessons learned is BEST completed by:
Lessons Learned become part of the historical database for the present project and other projects of the performing organization. The organization that does the work of the project should perform the lessons learned. The project work is
Using the data shown: TARGET COST: 12,000, TARGET FEE: 1000, SHARE RATION: 80/20 and PRICE CEILING: 14,000. The point of total assumption occurs at a cost of:
So, answer is (C). [Check this way...] When Actual Cost = 13250, cost overrun is 13250 12000 = 1250. So Incentive (actually penalty) = -1250 * 0.20 = -250 and Net Fee = 1000 250 = 750. Hence, Actual Price =
This is also equal to Ceiling Price.
Using the data shown: TARGET COST: 12,000, TARGET FEE: 1000, SHARE RATION: 80/20 and PRICE CEILING: 14,000. The profit at the point of total assumption is:
We need to calculate profit at PTA. PTA = 13250 means
Answer is C. [Or]
Using the information provided, if a project manager requires the use of a piece of equipment, how many days must he rent the equipment before the cost is equal to the total cost of leasing the equipment for one year? Rent Cost Leasing Cost
Project Risk Management includes all of the following processes except: [source: PMP Sample questions (Q#124) self compiled in Yahoo group.]
During risk planning your team cannot come up with an effective to mitigate or insure
A scenario is presented in which current variances are seen as typical. Here are the figures: PV=800, BAC=700, EV=675, AC=750.
Which approach to creating a WBS is often used for projects that involve new systems or approaches for doing a job?
You have accepted a position at a company where you will manage a group of projects in a coordinated way. The organization specifically hired you to help it have
2 people are arguing about what needs to be done to complete a task. If the project manager wants to know what is going on, she should pay MOST attention on:
The PM must still pay attention to what is said, etc. She is not excluding the other information.
What is the primary motivational tool of quality Theory X?
A customer, after explaining performance needs for a prospective purchase, accepts the seller's recommendation. This is an example of:
A company has to make a choice between two projects, because the available resources in money and kind are not sufficient to run both at the same time. Each project would take 9 months and would cost $250,000. The first project is a process optimization, which would result in a cost reduction of $120,000 per year. This benefit would be achieved immediately after the end of the project. The second project would be the development of a new product, which could produce the following net profits after the end of the project:
Explain the difference between Responsibility Assignment Matrix (RAM) and Linear Responsibility Chart (LRC). [#1] Reading through current PM literature, it is not difficult find at least six or seven different terms used to define the general intent and application of a Responsibility
Consider the information below, in which activities A, B, and D are on one path and must be performed in that sequence, and activity C is to be performed parallel to that path. Assuming cost is important, in which sequence should crashing of activities be planned? Normal Time: A=4, B=3, C=5, D=5 Crash Time: A=2, B-2, C=4, D=3 Normal Cost: A=10, B=20, C=14, D=25 Crash Cost: A=11, B=22, C=16, D=27 (Time in Weeks, Amounts in Thousands of Dollars)
Management reserve is needed on projects. According to the PMBOK Guide, which of the following is true about management reserve?
_____________ is the most accurate cost estimating technique.
A product life cycle is a series of phases whose name and number is determined by the organization's needs regarding control of the project.
In the phase sequence defined by project life cycles, a phase is not begun until all deliverables are approved from the preceding phase.
_____________ involves using project characteristics in a mathematical model.
Project risk is defined as the cumulative effect of chances of _____ which will adversely affect project objectives.
_____________ is generally the least accurate.
The _____________ task relationship is defined by the activity duration:
The contingency allowances established to cover unforeseen costs on your project have been set at 8% of total project cost. The total dollars in the contingency allowances are _____ as the project nears completion.
Contract close-out contains:
General Management encompasses all but:
A program is defined in the PMBOK as:
Which process is not included in Project Time Management?
Performance improvements include all but:
Which describes how cost variances will be managed?
__________ coordinates people and other resources to carry out the plan.
The process of identifying and defining a product or service is called:
The Critical Path Method of scheduling is:
The core planning processes are:
_____________ is controlling changes to the budget.
Key Management skills include:
The process that is not a part of time management is:
The outputs from schedule control include all except:
_____________ includes the process required to ensure that the project includes all the work required, and only the work required, to complete the project successfully.
Problem solving addresses potential problems on the project.
A resource pool description provides:
_________ recognizes that a project or phase should begin and commits the organization to do so.
An output of scope definition is:
Risk event is the precise description of what might happen to the _____ of the project.
A RAM is defined as:
Contingency planning is a means to _____ risks to the project through a formal process and provides the resources to meet the risk events.
____________ devises and maintains a worktable scheme to accomplish the business need that the project was undertaken to address.
Staffing requirements do not define:
A major assumption of all network scheduling methods is that activity durations must be _____.
Topics that deal with people include:
An output of the scope change control process is:
Constraints do not include:
_____________ is not one of the tools and techniques used in Contract Administration:
Operations and projects share many characteristics.
The outputs of Contract Administration are correspondence, contract changes, and payment requests.
The _____________ documents the characteristics of the product or service that the project was undertaken to create.
Outputs from the initiation process are:
A _______ is a series of actions bringing about a result.
_____________ involves determining what quantities are to be used to perform project activities.
Project Scope Management includes which processes:
_____________ is the cost estimating technique used most frequently in the early stages of a project.
Project Integration Management
Risk management is defined as the art and science of _____ risk factors throughout the life cycle of a project.
Inputs to contract administration do not include:
The duration of most activities will be significantly influenced by the resources assigned to them.
The process of developing a written scope statement as the basis for future project decisions is called:
Project selection criteria cover management concerns such as:
Which process is not included in Project Cost Management?
_____________ allocating the overall costs to individual work items in order to establish a cost baseline for measuring project performance.
Which is not an input to Procurement Planning?
A project can best be defined as:
Characteristics of project phases are:
Which is a phased budget used to measure and monitor cost performance on the project?
Project risk is characterized by three factors: _____.
A project is defined in the PMBOK as:
Project Stakeholders are definedas:
The tools and techniques used in the initiation process are:
Likely schedule durations for activity duration estimating are available from historical information that is derived from the following sources except:
_____________ is developing an approximation of the costs of the resources needed to complete project activities.
____________ must be measured regularly to identify variances from the plan.
_____________ is ensuring all features and functions are included in a product or service
A process that is not part of Project Risk Management is:
With triangular distribution, the low, likely and high values are 15, 20 and 40, respectively. The mean is _____.
The scope management provides:
Project Procurement Management includes:
A regulation is a document that lays down provisions with which compliance is mandatory.
Lessons learned are most often based upon project historical records. Lessons learned can be used to:
A graphic display of resource usage hours is:
Which is an input to resource planning?
Which tools or techniques are not used in activity sequencing?
_______________ ensures that project objectives are met by monitoring and measuring progress and taking corrective action when necessary.
You have a choice of accepting a fixed price contract for $115,000 with a liquidated damages clause or $100,000 without the clause. There is a 60% chance your cost will be $90,000 and a 40% chance your cost will be $80,000. There is a 98% chance of meeting your schedule but the penalty if missed is $50,000. Which is the best contract choice and how much profit would you make?
An example of a project is:
Inputs to Team Development include all but
The optimal organization structure for the project manager is:
Precedence diagramming method (PDM) uses which of the following dependencies
Which is not a tool or technique for Source Selection?
What is not among the tools and techniques of Organizational Planning?
____________ formalizes the acceptance of the project or phase and bringing it to an orderly end.
Resource leveling allocates scarce resources to critical path activities first.
The closing process scope includes:
An input to the scope planning process is:
Activity definition inputs include all except:
When the project team directs staff assignments, what is not considered in the selection of a staff?
_____________ involves estimating the cost of individual work items:
The most rapid cost estimating technique is:
_____________ is another term for top down estimating.
Tools & techniques for risk identification include
During project implementation the client interprets a clause in the contract to mean the he is entitled to a substantial refund for work recently completed. You review the clause and disagree with the client's conclusion. As the project manager which of the following actions should be taken?
Your customer wants your project, a process to dump "bad" eggs before it reaches the stores helves, to be completed 5 months earlier than planned. You believe you can meet this target by overlapping project activates. The approach you plan to use is known as:
Which of the following statements are true about the work breakdown structure?
Examples of team building activities include:
Resource planning involves determining what ____________ resources and what _______________ of each should be used and when they would be needed to perform project activities.
_________ is the formal procedure for sanctioning project work to ensure it is done at the right time.
Inputs to Integrated Change Control include:
A tool and technique of quality control that keeps errors from reaching the client is
The risk management plan us a major component of
Characteristics of a code of accounts are
Procurement planning is the process of identifying which project needs can best be met by procuring products or services outside the project organization. When should this effort be accomplished?
Inputs to contract closeout include
If the acceptance sampling attribute for a production lot is 20 percent
___________ is/are an uncertain event that or condition that, if it occurs, has appositive or negative effect on a project.
Outputs of procurement planning include
Establishing minimum requirements of performance for evaluation criteria is also know as a
Inputs to quality planning include
When the project does not obtain products and services from outside the performing organization, the processes from solicitation planning through contract closeout would
The SPI, which is used to estimate project completion date, is calculated by?
The overall duration of the project schedule is not influenced by:
Response development is sometimes referred to as
The terms strong matrix, balanced matrix, and weak matrix when applied to the matrix structure in project organization refer to the
The project manager should be assigned during what phase
Effective communication is critical for project success. Scope changes, constraints, assumptions, integration and interface requirements, overlapping roles and responsibilities, and many other factors all pose communications challenges. Communication barriers lead to
In what way does free float (FF) differ from total float (TF)?
As the leader of a project team, the project manager may be required to assess the competencies of his or her team members. Occasionally, some weaknesses or areas for improvement will be identified. The project manager should:
Which of the following is a tool or technique used in integrated change control?
The main difference between the two types (ADM and PDM) of the critical path method (CPM) of scheduling is the:
Tools and techniques of performance reporting include
Inputs to scope definition include
Contracts may be called
A scope change is defined as
Inputs to communication planning include
____________ sometimes, called risk symptoms or warning signs, are indications that a risk has occurred or is about to occur.
Before reporting a perceived violation of an established rule or policy the project manager should:
The project charter should be issued by
Name the ethical code you'll be required to adhere to as a PMP
All of the following are true of Pareto diagrams except
Inputs to scope verification include the following
The most common communication problem during negotiations is that
Outputs of Integrated Change Control include:
Residual and secondary risks are outputs from
One of the outputs of risk identification is
Tools and techniques for administrative closure include
Which of the following is not a tool or technique of project plan execution?
During your assignment as project manager you add a new member to your project team. This new team member was recently hired from a competitor and offers to share a substantial amount of proprietary information from his previous company. This information could put you and your team in a very strong position for future business. You are aware of a non-compete clause in the new hire's condition of employment. You should:
Tools and techniques for scope planning include
What is the preferred method of verifying scope?
One way to shorten your project schedule is to assign three developers to each activity in the project design phase instead of two. Although you are considering this approach, your design phase project team would double in size as a result. This approach tends to
What is the work breakdown structure typically used for?
To the extent possible, final contract language should reflect all agreements reached. Subjects usually covered contract financing, price and
In the first attempt in resource leveling the project schedule, what would you expect to occur?
What are the inputs to project Plan Execution?
Scope verification differs from quality control in that it is primarily concerned with
Tools and techniques of quality control include
In the closing phase of your project, a number of administrative issues must be completed. A concern is to assess project effectiveness. One way to accomplish this task is to--
A person's negotiating skills/temperament certainly are influenced by his/her culture. However,other factors, such as education and experience, also are at work. And over time, an individualwho is living in a culture that is different from his or her own may take on characteristics of thenew culture. This person may behave from a new frame of reference. With respect tonegotiation, this illustrates the importance of
Scope definition is
As a project manager your responsible for maintaining and ensuring integrity for all of the following except
During closeout, many project managers tend to delay personnel reassignment because
Monte Carlo analysis is
Inputs to risk management include
The chances for successful completion of a multidisciplinary project are increased if project team members are
Your lead engineer estimates that a work package will most likely require 50 weeks to complete. It could be completed in 40 weeks if all goes well, but it could take 180 weeks in the worst case. What is the PERT estimate for he expected duration of the work package?
A work authorization system is a _________________ for sanctioning project work to ensure that work is done at the right time and in the proper sequence.
The work breakdown structure which is an output of scope definition is
Tools and techniques of procurement planning include
Common causes of variances are a result of all of the following except:
The work breakdown structure is an output of what phase
The project schedule is not used to determine:
Scope definition is necessary to
Risk identification should be done
Inputs to cost estimating include the following
Which of the following is not a characteristic of a work package?
Quality audits when preformed correctly will provide the following benefit(s)
Outputs from response development could include all except?
In dealing with the client/customer, the project manager should always
The level of authority of the project manager:
You are the project manager and responsible for quality audits. You have been accused of being a fanatic because of your practice of conducting not one, but multiple, quality audits on a project. Which one of the following types of audits is not an example of a quality audit?
Activity A has a duration of 3 days and begins on the morning of Monday the 4th. The successor activity, B, has a finish-to-start relationship with A. The finish-to-start relationship has 3 days of lag, and activity B has a duration of 4 days. Sunday is a nonworkday. What can be determined from these data?
In organizing a project, a project manager must deal with conflict. Which statement is true regarding conflict in projects?
Design of experiments is an analytical technique which helps
A scope change control defines the procedures by which the project scope may be changed. It includes
Which of the following is true regarding schedule variances?
When choosing the most appropriate form of project organization, the first step is to
Steps in effective goal setting are:
Two of the types of discretionary dependencies that typically have an effect on the sequencing of the activities in the schedule are those containing "hard logic" and those containing "soft logic." An example of a "soft logic" dependency would be:
As part of your project plan you must develop an effective method of communication for your multinational team of stakeholders. You have several choices of media available. The appropriate action to take in the development of the communication plans would be to:
You are managing the development of a highly controversial project. Today you called a team meeting and explained the project objectives to the team and several members stood up and left citing philosophical objections to the project. You chased them down the hall trying to convince them to work on the project and explaining that you would use the best quality management plan available for this work. One of the team members stopped abruptly and demanded to know what the purpose of such a plan would be. You explained that the objective of any quality management plan is to
Inputs to procurement planning include
Information typically required to determine project communications requirements include
You are managing a project to develop nutritional soda for the "under 20" market. You have recently heard that the client calls your progress reports the "Code of Crap" because they seem to be written in a foreign language and incomprehensible. This situation could have been avoided by
Investment in project development prevention is most often borne by the
Inputs to contract administration include
The project manager, when communicating with an action-oriented person should
What are the tools and techniques for project plan development?
The diagram which ranks defects in the order of frequency of occurrence, using a histogram to depict 100 percent of the defects is called:
Team development is based on the
You are ready to enter a negotiating session with a group that is from Russi
You'll need to recognize project management terms and be able to apply them in your CAPM or PMP examination. A series of activities to create a unique product or service by a specific date is best described as which one of the following?
Ben is a new employee in your organization and he's been assigned to your project team. Ben doesn't understand why he is on your project team because he thinks everything is part of the organization's day-to-day operations. Which of the following is likely to be part of an operation?
You are the project manager of the HBH Project to install 40 new servers for your company network. You recommend, as part of your project planning, using progressive elaboration. Some of the project team members are confused on this concept. Of the following, which one is the best example of progressive elaboration?
Your organization utilizes projects, programs, and portfolios. Some of the project team members are confused on what a program is. A program is which one of the following?
Sam and Sarah are in a heated discussion over a new program in the organization. They are trying to determine who will make the tactical decisions in the projects within the program. Who manages programs?
While the project manager must balance risks, resources, and other aspects of the project, one of the fundamental concepts is the Iron Triangle. Of the following, which is not part of the Iron Triangle?
Holly is a new project manager and she's working toward her CAPM certification. She is having some trouble understanding which processes she should implement in her new project based on the available processes in the PMBOK Guide. Of the following, which statement is correct?
Projects are temporary endeavors to create a unique product, service, or result. Which one of the following does not relate to the concept of "temporary" in PART I project management?
Harold is the project manager of the JHG Project for his company and he's meeting with the key stakeholders to describe the deliverables of the project that will be implemented. Hanna, one of the stakeholders, is confused on why Harold talks about results of the project that aren't necessarily implemented. As an example, Harold says that a project creates a unique product, service, or result. Which one of the following is a result?
You are the project manager of the GHY Project for your company and you're working with the key project stakeholders to define the requirements of the project. One of the stakeholders mentions that there are industry standards, but there are also regulations for the project to consider. What is the difference between a standard and a regulation?
Project managers must be aware of the political and social environments that the project operates within. These environments can affect the project's ability to operate, can limit working hours, or cause embarrassment when the project manager assumes other cultures are the same as hers. Which one of the following is not a characteristic of a project's cultural and social environment?
Project managers need interpersonal skills, such as likeability, to help get the project work done. The project manager needs interpersonal skills to be effective in any organization and project. Which one of the following is not an example of an interpersonal skill?
Jane is a senior project manager in your company. Wally is a new project manager who is working toward his CAPM certification. Jane decides that Wally would be a good candidate to manage a subproject in the organization. Brenda, the project sponsor, isn't certain what Jane means by a subproject. What is a subproject?
Erin is a new project manager who is working toward her CAPM. She has been assigned a small project in her organization, but she feels that she could use some additional training, coaching, and mentoring. Where will a project manager most likely get project management mentoring?
Project managers and functional managers need to be able to recognize a condition that is best suited for a project, and a condition that is an operation PART I within an entity. Which one of the following is an example of operations?
There is a difference between the project, the project life cycle, the project schedule, and the overall project objective. At the core of these terms is the project life cycle. The project life cycle comprises which of the following?
You are the project manager of the GHY Project for your organization. You have been tasked with creating new software for your web site which must also be available to users on mobile devices. There are several deliverables that must be documented for this project. Which of the following best describes a project deliverable?
As the project manager, you must work with your project team to identify the project and the project phases within the project schedule. This identification helps to communicate expectations and outcomes of the project work. The compilation of all the phases within a project equates to the ____________________.
Projects move through a logical progression from the initiation to the project closure. It's important to understand the fluctuation of costs, schedules, resources, and risks within the logical progression of the project life cycle. Which of the following describes the early stages of a project?
Management has asked you to help them identify the points of the project where the risk of failure is highest and lowest. As a general rule, at which point is the risk of failure the lowest, but the consequence of failure the highest?
Marcy is the project manager of the GQD Project for her organization. She is working with Stan, the project sponsor, and they are identifying the most likely phases for this type of project work. Why would an organization divide a project into phases?
You are the project manager for your organization. Gary, a new project team member, approaches you because he's confused about the concept of the project life cycle. If you were explaining the project life cycle to Gary, you could say that all of the following are true statements about the project life cycle except for which one?
You are the project manager of a new project. When is the likelihood of failing to achieve the objectives the highest within your project?
You are the project manager for your organization and a new project has just been initiated. You know it is important to identify stakeholders and their attitudes toward the project as early as possible in the project life cycle. Which one of the following is an example of a positive stakeholder?
You know that there are positive, negative, and neutral stakeholders in your project. And based on your influence, stakeholders' attitudes toward the project can change. You want to work with the project team to ensure that all of the project stakeholders have been identified as part of the project initiation. None of the following are key project stakeholders except for which one?
You are the project manager for your organization and you're working with the project team to explain the approach of the project life cycle and how you'll be managing proposed changes to the project scope. As a general rule, at what point in the project may stakeholders most cost-effectively recommend changes to the project deliverable?
Beth is the project manager for her organization and she's just received word that the organization has decided to kill a project. When is this decision most likely made?
Nancy is a project manager for the NHG Corporation. She has identified several positive stakeholders for her construction project and a few negative stakeholders. Nancy and the project team have been meeting regularly with the positive stakeholders but have not met with the negative stakeholders. What can happen if Nancy ignores negative stakeholders?
Don is the project manager for his organization. In this project, his team will be comprised of local workers and workers from Scotland, India, and Belgium. Don knows that he needs to consider the working hours, culture, 02-ch02.indd 66 7/12/2013 3:55:18 AM All-in-1 / CAPM/PMP Project Management Certification All-in-One / Phillips / 177604-4 Chapter 2: Managing a Project 67 and expectations of this virtual team in order to manage it successfully. All of the following are cultural attributes of an organization except for which one? PART I
You are a new project manager for your organization. Management has asked you to begin creating a project management plan with your project team based on a recently initiated project. The project management plan defines which one of the following?
You are the project manager in your organization. Unlike your last job, which used a functional structure, this organization is utilizing a weak matrix. Who has full authority over project funding in a weak matrix?
Yolanda is the project manager of the Data Migration Project for her organization. As the project manager Yolanda should identify which project management processes are most appropriate for this type of project. What is a project process?
There are five project management process groups that allow projects to move from start to completion. Which one of the following is NOT one of the project management process groups?
You are the project manager of the GRT Construction Project. Your project team announces how they are happy to be done with project planning. You inform the team, however, that you and they will likely be returning to project planning throughout the project. This ongoing process of project planning is also known as _________________.
You are the project manager for the AQA Project. You would like to include several of the customers in the project planning sessions. Your project leader would like to know why the stakeholders should be involved since your project team will be determining the best method to reach the project objectives. You should include the stakeholders because _____________. 03-ch03.indd 115 7/12/2013 3:58:59 AM All-in-1 / CAPM/PMP Project Management Certification All-in-One / Phillips / 177604-4 CAPM/PMP Project Management Certification All-in-One Exam Guide 116
You are the project manager of a new mobile application project for a client. You have requested that several of the stakeholders participate in the initiation of the project. Why is this important?
You are coaching several new project managers in your organization about the project management life cycle and the purpose of each group. There is some confusion, however, about the actual purpose of the project management planning process group. What is the primary purpose of the planning process group?
Beth is the project customer for a home construction project. The project is likely to be awarded to your company's design firm, but there are still some questions regarding the proposal your company has offered to Beth. Robert, your manager, wants you to be the project manager on this project even though it technically hasn't been awarded to your company. When is a project manager typically selected?
Gary is teaching a group of project managers about the PMP and the PMBOK Guide. Gary wants to clearly communicate what project management is according to the PMBOK Guide. Which one of the following statements best describes what project management is? 03-ch03.indd 116 7/12/2013 3:59:00 AM All-in-1 / CAPM/PMP Project Management Certification All-in-One / Phillips / 177604-4 Chapter 3: Examining the Project Processes 117
Ron is the project manager of a new project and he's eager to meet the project team to get the project planned and the work moving. However, he's confused as to when he will actually acquire the team. In which process group will the project team be acquired?
Ben is the project manager for his company. A customer has requested a new website and asked that Ben serve as the project manager since he's done great work in the past for her company. Based on this information, when does a project become officially authorized?
You are the project manager of a new project to construct a children's playground in your community. The project is being funded by a private donor, but they expect you to manage the project with the fullest attention. When does the vast majority of a project's budget get expended?
You have identified a negative risk within your project and would like to implement a work-around to the risk. A work-around is an example of what?
You are working on a new high-profile project. Management has asked that you pause the project at the end of each project phase to communicate with them about the work and the project progress, and provide cost and schedule forecasts. Which process group can provide feedback between project phases?
You are the project manager of an IT upgrade project for a health care client. The client demands perfection in the project's product because of the lives your project's product will affect. Which process aims to eliminate causes of unsatisfactory performance?
Mick is the project manager of the CHA Design Project. The project has been performing poorly on both costs and schedule. The customer has become very aggravated with the project problems and has decided to cancel the project. Which process must happen next?
You are the project manager of a new project to develop a new software product. Management has not required a formal project management plan in the past, but they'd like you to develop a project management plan to serve as a model or template for all other projects in the organization. The primary purpose of your project management plan is:
In your project management plan development, you'll need several inputs. Of the following, which one is an input to project plan development?
Robert is the project manager of the HBQ Project. This project requires all of the telephones in the organization to be removed and replaced with an Internet phone. He's learned that the removal of some of the phones has 04-ch04.indd 157 7/10/2013 1:36:54 AM All-in-1 / CAPM/PMP Project Management Certification All-in-One / Phillips / 177604-4 CAPM/PMP Project Management Certification All-in-One Exam Guide 158 damaged the walls in the office building and they will need to be repaired. This project has a deadline and little time for repairing errors that weren't anticipated. Based on this information, which one of the following is the best example of defect repair review?
The project plan provides a baseline for several things. Which one of the following does the project plan NOT provide a baseline for?
Keisha is the project manager for her organization and she's working with her project team to develop the project management plan for a new project. The project team is confused about the change management plan and how it governs changes within the project. The project plan provides what in regard to project changes?
You are assisting the project manager for the DGF Project. This project is to design and implement a new application that will connect to a database server. Management has requested that you create a method to document technical direction on the project and any changes or enhancements to the technical attributes of the project deliverable. Which one of the following PART II would satisfy management's request?
You are a project manager of a project that is part of a program. There has been some conflict among the project team about who assigns activities and directs the project execution. In this scenario, who directs the performance of the planned project activities?
You have just informed your project team that each team member will be contributing to the lessons learned documentation. Your team does not understand this approach and wants to know what the documentation will be used for. Which one of the following best describes the purpose of the lessons learned documentation?
Fred is the project manager of a bridge construction project. His organization and the city inspectors both have an interest in the success and overall performance of the project and have asked Fred to identify the approach he'll use to measure and report project performance. Which one of the following measures project performance?
The project manager can help write the project charter, but is not the person signing the project charter. Regardless of who actually writes the charter, there are several elements that should be included in the document. All of the following are addressed in the project charter, except for which one?
Terri's organization is moving through the process of selecting one of several projects. Her organization utilizes mathematical models to determine the projects that should be initiated. Which one of the following is an example of a mathematical model used to select projects for selection?
You and the project management team are creating a project statement of work. As part of this activity, which one of the following should be referenced in the project statement of work document?
The project management plan has several purposes and all projects should have a plan. What is the purpose of the project management plan?
The project steering committee is considering which project they should invest capital in. Mary's project promises to be worth $175,000 in four years. The project steering committee is interested in Mary's project, but they would like to know the present value of the return if the interest rate is 6 percent. What is the present value of Mary's project? PART II
You are the project manager for your organization. A change has recently been approved by your organization's change control board. You need to update the scope baseline and what other document?
Henry is the project manager for his organization, and management has asked him to create a project management plan to define the scope statement. Which project management plan guides the creation of the detailed project scope statement?
You are the project manager of the GYH Project. This project will create a walking bridge across the Tennessee River. You've been asked to start the process of creating the project scope statement and you need to gather the elements for this process. Which one of the following is not needed to define the project scope?
Marty is the project manager of the Highway 41 Bridge Project and he's working with his project team members to create the WBS. Marty shows the team how to break down the project scope into the WBS components, but the team doesn't understand how far down the breakdown should occur. Marty should call the lowest-level item in a WBS what?
You are working with the project team to create the WBS. There are some elements in the WBS that can't be broken down yet. You and the team elect to break down these items later in the project as more details become available. This approach to creating the WBS is also known as what? 05-ch05.indd 196 7/10/2013 1:42:50 AM All-in-1 / CAPM/PMP Project Management Certification All-in-One / Phillips / 177604-4 Chapter 5: Managing the Project Scope 197
You are the project manager for your organization and you're creating the WBS for a new project. In your WBS, you're numbering each level of the PART II components following a project sequenced numbering order. Your WBS is numbered in a hierarchical fashion for easy identification and reference. This numbering scheme is called what?
You'll use the scope management plan to define the project scope statement. You'll also use this plan to build the scope baseline. Which two items are parts of the scope baseline for the project?
Throughout the project, you have milestones scheduled at the end of each phase. Tied to these milestones you have a project management requirement of scope validation. Scope validation leads to what?
You've just reached the end of your project and management has asked you and several key stakeholders to begin the scope validation process. What is a tool and technique used during scope validation?
David, one of your project team members, has been making changes to his work, which, as a result, changes the project scope. David's changes are also known as what? 05-ch05.indd 197 7/10/2013 1:42:50 AM All-in-1 / CAPM/PMP Project Management Certification All-in-One / Phillips / 177604-4 CAPM/PMP Project Management Certification All-in-One Exam Guide 198
As the project manager, you are averse to change once the scope statement has been approved. You do not want changes to enter the project because these changes can have a wide impact on the project as a whole. Which system defines how the project scope and the product scope can be changed?
A scope change has been approved in Marcy's project. All of the following must be updated to reflect the change except for which one?
It's important for you, the project manager, to understand what each of the project management processes create. One of the key processes you'll do is scope control throughout your project. Which of the following is an output of scope control?
You are the project manager for the JHG Project. Your project is to create a new product for your industry. You have recently learned that your 05-ch05.indd 198 7/10/2013 1:42:50 AM All-in-1 / CAPM/PMP Project Management Certification All-in-One / Phillips / 177604-4 Chapter 5: Managing the Project Scope 199 competitor is also working on a similar project, but their offering will include a computer-aided program and web-based tools, which your project does not offer. You have implemented a change request to update your project accordingly. This is an example of which of the following?
You are the project manager of a large project. Your project sponsor and management have approved you to outsource portions of the project plan. What must be considered if a change request affects the procured work?
You are the project manager for a large construction project. The architect has provided your project team with blueprints detailing the exact layout of the building your team will be creating. He insists that the team follow the blueprints as he's designed them. The blueprints are an example of which one of the following? 05-ch05.indd 199 7/10/2013 1:42:50 AM All-in-1 / CAPM/PMP Project Management Certification All-in-One / Phillips / 177604-4 CAPM/PMP Project Management Certification All-in-One Exam Guide 200
Complete this sentence: Project scope management is primarily concerned with defining and controlling ____________________.
You are the project manager of a large project for your organization. Much of the project will center on new software which you'll be installing on 4500 laptops in stages. Because of the likelihood of change, you've recommended a rolling wave planning approach. Which one of the following is the best example of rolling wave planning?
You and the project team have created the work breakdown structure based on the project scope and requirements. Your next step is to create the project's activity list. Which one of the following will NOT be included in the activity list created with the project management team?
Mary has created an activity list with her project team. She has included activity attributes for each of the activities in her project activity list. Of the following, which one is not an example of an activity attribute that Mary likely included? PART II
Your project team agrees that the server operating system must first be installed before the application can be installed. This best describes which one of the following?
You are working with your project team to schedule activities for your construction project. You have scheduled the painting activity to be completed before the carpet installation activity may begin. The relationship between the painting activity and carpet installation activity can best be described as which one of the following?
You are the project manager for your organization, and the following illustration represents your project. Based on the following illustration. How long will the project last?
Beth is the project manager of her company and she's asked you to help her with project schedule network analysis. Examine the illustration to the right. If Activity B is delayed by two days, how late will the project be?
Ronald is the project manager for his company. He has created a project network diagram for the activities in the activity list and he's trying now to begin the process of float determination. He's asked for your help. Examine the following illustration. Which path is the critical path?
You are the project manager of the PJG Project for your company. This project is similar to a project you completed a few months ago and you'd like to reference the older project for information. Which estimating technique uses PART II a similar project to predict how long the current project will take to complete?
You are the project manager of the Data Warehouse Project. You've just recently created the project network diagram and you now want to identify the critical path. Which one of the following best describes the critical path?
Management has asked that you create the schedule management plan to identify the different processes and procedures your project will require. During the creation of the plan, you need to identify schedule control and its components. Schedule control is part of which project management process? 06-ch06.indd 249 7/10/2013 1:47:00 AM All-in-1 / CAPM/PMP Project Management Certification All-in-One / Phillips / 177604-4 CAPM/PMP Project Management Certification All-in-One Exam Guide 250
Terry is the project manager of the network update project and the project stakeholders have requested that four new servers be added to the project. This addition will cause changes in the project costs and schedule. Which system can manage changes to the project schedule?
Which schedule development tool does not consider the availability of the project resources, only when the work may take place in the project?
You are working with your project team to respond to some delays in the project schedule. You have elected to crash the project schedule and management wants to know what effect this will have on the project as a whole. What happens when a project manager elects to crash a project?
You are the project manager for a new technology implementation project. Management has requested that your estimates be as exact as possible. Which one of the following methods of estimating will provide the most accurate estimate? 07-ch07.indd 291 7/12/2013 4:48:07 AM All-in-1 / CAPM/PMP Project Management Certification All-in-One / Phillips / 177604-4 CAPM/PMP Project Management Certification All-in-One Exam Guide 292
Amy is the project manager for her company and she's working with the project team to determine the effect of a proposed change on the project's budget. When Amy looks at the change, she tells the team that the change will pass through project's cost change control system. What does the cost change control system do?
You are the project manager for the CSR Training Project, and 21,000 customer service reps are invited to attend the training session. Attendance is optional. You have calculated the costs of the training facility, but the workbook expense depends on how many students register for the class. For every 5,000 workbooks created, the cost is reduced by a percentage of the original printing cost. The workbook expense is an example of which one of PART II the following?
You are the project manager of the Network Upgrade Project for your company. Management has asked that you create a cost estimate of the project so they can determine the project funding. You gather the inputs for the cost estimate and begin the process of cost estimating. Of the following costestimating inputs, which one is the least reliable?
You can purchase pea gravel for your project at $437 per metric ton. You need four tons of the pea gravel, so you predict your costs will be $1,748. This is an example of which cost-estimating approach?
Which one of the following is an example of resource cost rates that a project manager could use to predict the cost of the project?
You have created a cost estimate for a new project that you'll be managing in your organization. All of the following should be included in your cost estimate except for which one?
Linda is the project manager of a construction project. The budget for her project is $275,000. The project team made a mistake early in the project that cost $34,000 in added materials. Linda does not believe the mistakes will likely happen again because the team is 30 percent complete with the project and things are once again going smoothly. Her sponsor wants to know how much more funding Linda will likely need on the project. What should Linda tell the sponsor? PART II
A project had a budget of $750,000 and was completed on time. The project expenses, however, were 15 percent more than what the project called for. What is the variance at the completion for this project?
Marty is the project manager of a software development project. He has reviewed the project's costs and progress and he realizes that he has a cost variance of $44,000. He needs to complete what type of report?
You are the project manager for the Photo Scanning Project. This project is similar to another project you have completed. Your project is to electronically store thousands of photos for your city's historical society. Quality is paramount on this project. Management approaches you and asks why you have devoted so much of the project time to planning. Your response is which of the following?
You are the project manager for the recently initiated Floor Installation Project. Today you plan to meet with your project team to ensure that the project is completed with no deviations from the project requirements. This process is which of the following?
Juan is the project manager for his organization and he's asked Beth, a project team member, to help him create a fishbone diagram. Beth doesn't know what this is and asks for your help. A fishbone diagram is the same as a(n) ______________________ diagram.
You are the project manager of the Condo IV Construction project and you're working with your project team and the project sponsor to identify the quality metrics and develop the quality management plan for the project. In light of this planning event, which of the following is most true about quality? 08-ch08.indd 325 7/10/2013 1:50:33 AM All-in-1 / CAPM/PMP Project Management Certification All-in-One / Phillips / 177604-4 CAPM/PMP Project Management Certification All-in-One Exam Guide 326
You are the project manager for the KOY Project, which requires quality that maps to federal guidelines. To ensure that you can meet these standards, you have elected to put the project team through training specific to the federal guidelines your project must adhere to. The costs of these classes can be assigned to which of the following?
You are the project manager of the Global Upgrade Project. Your project team consists of 75 project team members around the world. Each team member will be upgrading a piece of equipment in many different facilities. Which of the following could you implement to ensure that project team members are completing all of the steps in the install procedure with quality? PART II
Mark is the project manager of the PMH Project. Quality inspection of the deliverables show several problems. Management has asked Mark to create a chart showing the distribution of problems and their frequencies. Given this, management wants which of the following?
In the illustration to the right, what does the circled area represent?
A project manager has elected not to enforce safety measures on his construction project. One of the project team members has been injured because of this oversight, and the job site is closed until an investigation into the lack of safety measures is completed. The project will now likely be late, be fined for the error, and lose credibility with the customer. This is an example of which one of the following?
What is the type of chart to the right called?
You are the project manager of the Condo IV Construction project and you're working with your project team and the project sponsor to identify the quality metrics and develop the quality management plan for the project. In light of this planning event, which of the following is most true about quality?
Mark is the project manager of the PMH Project. Quality inspections of the deliverables show several problems. Management has asked Mark to create a chart showing the distribution of problems and their frequencies. Given this, management wants which of the following?
With regard to project team procurement, reasons why the project manager can use this alternative include, but are not limited to, the following: * The performing organization lacks the internal resources with the needed skills to complete the project work. * The work is more cost-effective to procure. * The project team members are present within the organization, but they are not available to the current project because of the organizational structure, such as a functional or projectized structure. * The project team members are present within the organization, but they cannot complete the needed work due to other project assignments. Managing a Virtual Team Placing all of the project team members in one geographical location is ideal for many project managers. In theory, having all of the project team members together allows the team members to quickly communicate, work with each other, and generally work better as a team. In reality, that's not always possible: Team members are spread around the globe, space isn't necessarily available in one locale, and other logistics could prevent bringing all of the project team together in a project war room. (And yes, there's no fighting in the war room.) Virtual teams, however, are more likely in today's world. Collaboration software, Internet tools, phone calls, and e-mails can help increase communications and the 09-ch09.indd 349 7/12/2013 4:50:49 AM All-in-1 / CAPM/PMP Project Management Certification All-in-One / Phillips / 177604-4 CAPM/PMP Project Management Certification All-in-One Exam Guide 350 sense of a co-located team without the expense and improbability of a co-located team. Virtual teams allow the organization to: * Create a project team that comprises experts from around the globe * Permit people to work from home offices * Permit people to work different shifts and hours * Include people on the project team who may have mobility limitations * Save monies by not incurring travel expenses EXAM TIP The negative side to virtual teams is that communication can be more difficult, and costs can be incurred from coordinating and managing the needed communication among the virtual team. Utilizing a Multicriteria Decision Analysis Process A multicriteria decision analysis process sounds real formal, scientific, and scary, but it's mainly a method to rank a potential project team member on several factors to see if the person should be on the project team. To use this approach, you'd identify several factors, assign scores to the different factors, and then measure each team member by those factors. Here's a quick example I made up with scoring: * Skills, 5 points What skills does the person have that the project needs? * Knowledge, 3 points Does this person have specialized knowledge about the processes, the customer, or the project life cycle? * Costs, 6 points How much is this person going to cost the project? * Availability, 3 points Will this person be available for the duration of the project? * Experience, 4 points Does this person have experience with the technology the project will be implementing? Using these simple factors, you could measure and compare each potential team member and make a determination of their scored value to the project. You can add as many factors as needed and perhaps create a minimum threshold of points that the person must have to be invited onto your project team. Assembling the Project Team With the project team assembled, the project manager can continue planning, assigning activities, and managing the project progression. Project team members can be assigned to the project on a fullor part-time basis, depending on the project conditions. Once the project team is built, a project team directory should be assembled. The project team directory should include the project team members': 09-ch09.indd 350 7/12/2013 4:50:49 AM All-in-1 / CAPM/PMP Project Management Certification All-in-One / Phillips / 177604-4 Chapter 9: Managing Project Human Resources 351 * Names * Phone numbers * E-mail addresses * Mailing addresses, if the team is geographically dispersed As well as: PART II * Contact information for key stakeholders * Additional relevant contact information for team members, such as photos, web addresses, and so on Developing the Project Team The project team is developed by enhancing the competencies of the individual project team members and promoting the interaction of all the project team members. Throughout the project, the project manager will have to work to develop the project team. The project manager may have to develop an individual team member's skills so that she can complete her assignments. The project manager will also have to work to develop the project team as a whole so that the team can work together to complete the project. In matrix organizations, the project team members are accountable to the project manager and to their functional managers. Developing the project team can prove challenging, since the project team members may feel pulled between multiple bosses. The project manager must strive to involve and develop the project team members as individuals completing project work--and as team members completing the project objectives together. Preparing for Team Development Team development is a natural process, but it's also a process that the project manager can usher along. If you're the project manager and you want your team to work together, get along, and focus on completing the project rather than on who's really in charge of the project, you'll need these inputs: * Staff assignments The assignments of the project team members define their skills, their needs for development, and their abilities to complete the project work as individuals and as part of the team. * Human resource plan Recall that the human resource plan details how project team members will be brought onto the project, managed, and released from the project team. * Resource availability You'll need to know when your project team members are available and when they're vacationing in the desert. This component also considers when project team members are on multiple projects within your organization and allows you to plan for when you'll utilize the project team members best. 09-ch09.indd 351 7/12/2013 4:50:49 AM All-in-1 / CAPM/PMP Project Management Certification All-in-One / Phillips / 177604-4 CAPM/PMP Project Management Certification All-in-One Exam Guide 352 Leading Project Team Development Due to the temporary nature of projects, it can be tough for a group of strangers to form relationships and immediately create a successful project. Team development is the guidance, direction, and leadership the project manager offers to influence a project team. The project manager needs interpersonal skills, sometimes called "soft" skills, to help alleviate the project team's fears, concerns, and anxiety about the project. The project manager should use empathy, leadership, and group facilitation to move team development along. Training the project team is one of the best team development exercises. The staffing management plan defines the need for training, and team development is the execution of that plan. In other words, if team members don't know how to do the project work, train them! Another facet of team development is a focus on getting the project work completed. The project managers are the power on the project team. While there may be some resistance from the project team to cooperate with the project manager, complete assigned duties, or participate as requested, the project team should realize that the project manager is the project authority. There are five types of powers that the project manager wields: * Expert The project manager's authority comes from both experience with the technology the project focuses on and from expertise in managing projects. * Reward The project manager has the authority to reward the project team. * Formal The project manager has been assigned the role of project manager by senior management and is in charge of the project. This is also known as positional power. * Coercive The project manager has the authority to discipline the project team members. This is also known as penalty power. When the team is afraid of the project manager, the project manager has coercive power. * Referent The project team personally knows the project manager. Referent can also mean that the project manager refers to the person who assigned him or her the position--for example, "The CEO assigned me to this position, so we'll do it this way." This power can also mean the project team wants to work on the project or with the project manager due to the high priority and impact of the project. Creating Team-Building Activities Team-building activities are approaches to developing the team through facilitated events. The goal of team-building exercises is to allow the project team to learn about each other, rely on each other, and form cohesiveness among the project team members. Events can include: * Involving the team during planning processes * Defining rules for handling team disagreements 09-ch09.indd 352 7/12/2013 4:50:49 AM All-in-1 / CAPM/PMP Project Management Certification All-in-One / Phillips / 177604-4 Chapter 9: Managing Project Human Resources 353 * Holding off-site activities * Facilitating quick team-involvement activities * Facilitating activities to improve interpersonal skills and form relationships There's a general belief that project teams actually go through their own natural development processes. These processes can shift, linger, and even stall based on the dynamics of the project team. This theory of team development was created by Dr. PART II Bruce Tuckman in 1965. Here are the five phases of team development that project managers may face: * Forming The project team meets and learns about their roles and responsibilities on the project. Little interaction among the project team happens in this stage, as the team is learning about the project and project manager. The project manager guides the project team through this stage of team development by introducing members and helping them learn about one another. * Storming The project team struggles for project positions, leadership, and project direction. The project team can become hostile toward the project leader, challenge ideas, and try to establish and claim positions about the project work. The amount of debate and fury can vary depending on whether the project team is willing to work together, the nature of the project, and the control of the project manager. The project manager's role in this stage is to mediate disagreement and squelch unproductive behavior. * Norming Project team members go about getting the project work, begin to rely on one another, and generally complete their project assignments. In this stage of team development, the project manager allows the project team to manage themselves. * Performing If a project team can reach the performing stage of team development, they trust one another, work well together, and issues and problems get resolved quickly and effectively. The project manager stays out of the project team's way, but is available to help the project team get their work done. * Adjourning Once the project is done, either the team moves onto other assignments as a unit, or the project team is disbanded and individual team members go on to other work. The project manager uses the staffing management plan as a guide for how project team members are released from the project team. NOTE Tuckman originally used just the first four stages of team development, but added adjourning to the model in the 1970s. 09-ch09.indd 353 7/12/2013 4:50:49 AM All-in-1 / CAPM/PMP Project Management Certification All-in-One / Phillips / 177604-4 CAPM/PMP Project Management Certification All-in-One Exam Guide 354 Establishing Project Ground Rules Creating ground rules for the project team is part of team development. Ground rules establish the project expectations for the project team and define what is and is not acceptable behavior by all of the project team members, including the project manager. When all of the project team members agree to abide by the defined ground rules, misunderstandings diminish while productivity increases. Once ground rules are defined, it's the responsibility of all the project team members to enforce them. EXAM TIP Ground rules are enforced by the project team, not just the project manager. Relying on Interpersonal Management Skills As a project manager, you need interpersonal skills to lead the project team. You might know these as soft skills or emotional intelligence, but they're really about understanding what motivates a person, how you can lead the person, and how to really listen to a person on your project team. While project management is about getting things done, you're dealing with people that have issues, concerns, stress, anxiety, and a life beyond your project. You need to listen to the project team, empathize with them as needed, and help them manage their project work and assignment. This is a great example where a more experienced project manager can shift from the project manager role and see the project from the perspective of the team member. A chunk of project management relies on interpersonal skills. Specifically, the project manager relies on: * Leading Good project managers master the art of establishing direction, aligning people, and motivating the project team to complete the project work. * Communicating Good project managers are good communicators. Remember, half of communicating is listening. * Negotiating Project managers will likely negotiate for scope, cost, terms, assignment, and resources. * Problem solving Project managers must have the ability to confront and solve problems. * Influencing Project managers use their influence to get things done. Rewarding the Project Team When discussing human resource planning, I mentioned that you, the project manager, should create the rewards and recognition system. This system is part of team development and encourages the behavior you want from your project team--that is, the behavior that promotes the project to completion and meets the project scope statement. Performance appraisals tell the project manager, and sometimes functional manage09-ch09.indd 354 7/12/2013 4:50:49 AM All-in-1 / CAPM/PMP Project Management Certification All-in-One / Phillips / 177604-4 Chapter 9: Managing Project Human Resources 355 ment, which team members should be rewarded based on the confines of the reward system. Obviously, positive behavior should be rewarded. If a project team member willingly agrees to work overtime to ensure that the project will hit its schedule objective, that should be rewarded or recognized by the project manager. However, if a project team member has to work overtime because he has wasted time or resources, a reward is not in order. PART II Win-lose awards, sometimes called zero-sum awards, should be avoided because they can hurt the project team's cohesiveness. Any award where only some of the project team members can qualify shouldn't be given. For instance, I once worked on a project where the project manager awarded the software developer who created the most code a bonus every month. Well, since I wasn't a software developer, I could never qualify for that bonus. (Thanks a lot, Ron! Ron was my boss then, and oh what sweet printed vengeance this is. Just kidding... He dropped the bonus program when he saw the trouble with his plan.) EXAM TIP Your reward and recognition system should also consider cultural differences. Creating team rewards in a culture that encourages individualism can be difficult. In other words, the reward system must mesh with the culture within which the project manager is operating. Assessing the Project Team You want your project team to be the best unit of people possible. You want them to rely on one another, help each other, and communicate without fear of retribution. You also want the project team to be competent in the project work and execution of the project management plan. Personnel assessment tools, such as exams and surveys, can help you gain some insight into the project team and where each person's strengths and weaknesses lie. This can help you determine how to better manage the project team, improve performance, and gain insight into what motivates team members. The assessments of the project team can measure all sorts of factors, but there are some common measurements as a result of the assessment program: * Technical success of the project execution * Project schedule adherence * Cost baseline management * Improvement in competencies * Reduction in staff turnover * Team functionality in communications and problem solving Project team members' performance is reviewed and tied to their overall performance on the project team. Performance appraisals can be in the form of a 360-degree 09-ch09.indd 355 7/12/2013 4:50:50 AM All-in-1 / CAPM/PMP Project Management Certification All-in-One / Phillips / 177604-4 CAPM/PMP Project Management Certification All-in-One Exam Guide 356 appraisal, where a project team member is reviewed in all directions by the project team, the project manager, stakeholders, and even vendors, where appropriate. Managing the Project Team Now that the project manager has planned for the human resources and developed the project team, he can focus on managing the project team. This process involves tracking each team member's performance, offering feedback, taking care of project issues, and managing those pesky change requests that can affect the project team and its work. The staffing management plan may be updated based on lessons learned and changes within the team management process. In a matrix environment, where the project team members are accountable to both the project manager and a functional manager, team management is a tricky business. The project manager and the functional managers need to work together to communicate the utilization of the project team member in both operations and on the project. The project team's demand for dual reporting to the project manager and the functional manager also has to be considered--and is often the responsibility of the project manager rather than the functional manager or project team member. Preparing for Team Management Managing the project team is based on many conditions and scenarios within the project. Management of the project team is really about one thing: getting the project work done as promised in the project scope statement. There are many inputs to project team management: * Human resource plan You know this plan, right? Just in case you forgot, it defines when project team members will complete their project work, the training needs for the project, certification requirements, and any labor compliance issues. It's an output of human resources planning. * Project staff assignments The project manager and the project management team both need a listing of the project staff assignments in order to monitor and evaluate each project team member's project performance. * Team performance assessments You'll know if your project team is doing a good job or not, but you'll want to quantify their performance so that you can make recommendations where needed. Assessments include information on the project team's skills, competencies, turnover rate, and team cohesion. * Issue log Any issues that have been found in the project should be documented in this log. A project team member is assigned to the resolution of the issue by a given date, so this log is considered an input to managing the project team. * Work performance reports The project management team observes and records the work a project team member performs. This doesn't necessarily 09-ch09.indd 356 7/12/2013 4:50:50 AM All-in-1 / CAPM/PMP Project Management Certification All-in-One / Phillips / 177604-4 Chapter 9: Managing Project Human Resources 357 mean the project management team peers over the shoulder of the project team member, but rather observes the team member's participation in team activities, their delivery on action items, and thoroughness in communication. * Organizational process assets Consider the organization's approach to rewarding employees for their work in a project. Organizational process assets in team management rely on dinners, certificates of appreciation, newsletters, and other methods to recognize a project team's hard work on a project. PART II All of these inputs feed directly into the actual process of managing the project team. The project manager and the project management team will use the evidence of these things to better manage the team in order to move the project toward completion. Dealing with Team Disagreements In most projects, there will be instances when the project team, management, and other stakeholders disagree on the progress, decisions, and proposed solutions within the project. It's essential for the project manager to keep calm, lead, and direct the parties to a sensible solution that's best for the project. Here are seven reasons for conflict, listed from most common to least common: * Schedules * Priorities * Resources * Technical beliefs * Administrative policies and procedures * Project costs * Personalities EXAM TIP You can expect questions on these areas of conflict on the exam. Don't be duped into thinking personality conflicts are the biggest problem with conflict resolution. They are the least important. So what's a project manager to do with all the potential for strife in a project? There are five different approaches to conflict resolution: * Collaborate/Problem Solve This approach utilizes multiple viewpoints and perspectives to find a resolution. To utilize this method, the participants need a collaborative attitude to confront the problem rather than each other. * Force/Direct The person with the power makes the decision. The decision made may not be the best decision for the project, but it's fast. As expected, this autocratic approach does little for team development and is a win-lose 09-ch09.indd 357 7/12/2013 4:50:50 AM All-in-1 / CAPM/PMP Project Management Certification All-in-One / Phillips / 177604-4 CAPM/PMP Project Management Certification All-in-One Exam Guide 358 solution. It should be used when the stakes are high and time is of the essence, or if relationships are not important. * Compromise/Reconcile This approach requires that both parties give up something. The decision made is a blend of both sides of the argument. Because neither party really wins, it is considered a lose-lose solution. The project manager can use this approach when the relationships are equal and no one can truly "win." This approach can also be used to avoid a fight. * Smoothing/Accommodating This approach smoothes out the conflict by minimizing the perceived size of the problem. It is a temporary solution, but can calm team relations and boisterous discussions. Smoothing may be acceptable when time is of the essence or when any of the proposed solutions will not currently settle the problem. This can be considered a lose-lose situation as well, since no one really wins in the long run. The project manager can use smoothing to emphasize areas of agreement between disagreeing stakeholders and thus minimize areas of conflict. * Withdrawal/Avoidance This conflict resolution has one side of the argument walking away from the problem, usually in disgust. The conflict is not resolved, and it is considered a yield-lose solution. The approach can be used, however, as a cooling-off period or when the issue is not critical. Creating an Issue Log It's okay to have issues within a project as long as the issues are recorded in the issue log. An issue, technically, is something that may be preventing the project team from reaching the project objectives. Typically, issues are identified and recorded in the issue log. Each issue is assigned to an owner who needs to find a method that will resolve the issue by a given date. Each issue should also be identified as to its status and possible resolution. Common issues are: * Differences of opinion * Situations to be investigated * Unanticipated responsibilities that need to be assigned to someone on the project team Examining the Outputs of Team Management Team management begins as soon as the project team comes together, and ends as soon as the project is closed. Throughout the project, different conditions and scenarios will affect how the project manager and the project management team will manage the project and the resources within it. There are five outputs of managing the project team: 09-ch09.indd 358 7/12/2013 4:50:50 AM All-in-1 / CAPM/PMP Project Management Certification All-in-One / Phillips / 177604-4 Chapter 9: Managing Project Human Resources 359 * Requested changes Seems like just about everything can result in a change request, doesn't it? Changes to the project team can have ripple effects on the project scheduling, project cost, and even the project scope statement, so a change request is needed when these conditions are true. Corrective actions can include moving people to different assignments, outsourcing some of the project work, and replacing project team members who may have left the organization or project. Preventive actions can include cross-training, role PART II clarification, and even additional labor through hiring or procurement to ensure that all of the project work is completed as planned. * Project management plan updates Just like any other area of project management, if the project management plan needs to be updated, it should be. Project management plan updates could include approved change requests, corrective actions, new project team member roles, and training decisions. * Project document updates Updates to the issue log, role description, and staff assignments should be reflected in the project documents as needed. You may need to update the roles and responsibility charts, such as your RACI chart, to reflect the changes within the project and/or project team. * Enterprise environmental factor updates It is possible that your management approach could affect the enterprise environmental factors within your organization. You may need to update the process for performance appraisals and any information about project team members' new skills as a result of the project training. * Organizational process assets updates You'll need to update the organizational process assets for your project as a result of managing the project team. This will likely include any templates you've created, historical information, and lessons learned documentation. What the project management team learns in the project becomes part of organizational process assets for future projects. For example, lessons learned in human resources include: * Staffing management plan * Organizational charts * Position descriptions * Ground rules * Conflict management techniques * Successful rewards and recognition approaches * Procedures for virtual team management * Negotiating techniques * Training programs 09-ch09.indd 359 7/12/2013 4:50:50 AM All-in-1 / CAPM/PMP Project Management Certification All-in-One / Phillips / 177604-4 CAPM/PMP Project Management Certification All-in-One Exam Guide 360 * Successful team-building exercises * Issues and solutions documented in the project log Relating to Organizational Theories You can expect to see some of these topics on your exam, so let's have a look at these theories in more detail. Maslow's Hierarchy of Needs According to Abraham Maslow, people work to take care of a hierarchy of needs. The pinnacle of their needs is self-actualization. People want to contribute, prove their worth, and use their skills and abilities. Figure 9-4 shows the pyramid of needs that all people try to ascend by fulfilling each layer, one at a time. Maslow's five layers of needs, from lowest to highest, are: * Physiological People require these necessities to live: air, water, food, clothing, and shelter. * Safety People need safety and security. This can include stability in life, work, and culture. * Social People are social creatures and need love, approval, and friends. * Esteem People strive for the respect, appreciation, and approval of others. * Self-actualization At the pinnacle of needs, people seek personal growth, knowledge, and fulfillment. Figure 9-4 Maslow's theory states that people ultimately work for self-actualization. 09-ch09.indd 360 7/12/2013 4:50:50 AM All-in-1 / CAPM/PMP Project Management Certification All-in-One / Phillips / 177604-4 Chapter 9: Managing Project Human Resources 361 Herzberg's Theory of Motivation According to Frederick Herzberg, a psychologist and authority on the motivation of work, there are two catalysts for success with people: * Hygiene agents These elements are the expectations all workers have. They include job security, a paycheck, clean and safe working conditions, a sense of belonging, civil working relationships, and other basic attributes associated PART II with employment. * Motivating agents These are the elements that motivate people to excel. They include responsibility, appreciation of work, public recognition for a job well done, the chance to excel, education, and other opportunities associated with work aside from financial rewards. This theory says that the presence of hygiene factors will not motivate people to perform because these are expected attributes. However, the absence of these elements will demotivate performance. For people to excel, the presence of motivating factors must exist. Figure 9-5 illustrates Herzberg's Theory of Motivation. EXAM COACH Use Herzberg's Theory for your exam. Find some things that will motivate you to excel so you can pass your exam: a career advancement, a day off work, new clothes, or some other reward. Create an incentive that means something to you. After all, part of Herzberg's Theory is that the motivating agents have to interest the person that's being motivated. McGregor's Theory of X and Y Douglas McGregor's theory states that, from their perspective, management believes there are two types of workers, good and bad, as seen in Figure 9-6. Theory X sees workers as lazy, uninterested in doing the project work, and that they must be micromanaged Figure 9-5 Hygiene agents do nothing to motivate, but their absence will cause performance and morale to decline. 09-ch09.indd 361 7/12/2013 4:50:50 AM All-in-1 / CAPM/PMP Project Management Certification All-in-One / Phillips / 177604-4 CAPM/PMP Project Management Certification All-in-One Exam Guide 362 Figure 9-6 X People Y People Management believes that "X" people are bad and "Y" people Micromanagement Self-led are good. No trust Motivated Lazy Capable Avoid work and coerced to do the work. Theory Y sees workers as good, self-directed, and able to do the work that's assigned to them. * X is bad. These people need to be watched all the time, micromanaged, and cannot be trusted. X people avoid work, shun responsibility, and lack the aptitude to achieve. * Y is good. These people are self-led, motivated, and can accomplish new tasks proactively. Ouchi's Theory Z William Ouchi's theory is based on the participative management style of the Japanese. This theory states that workers are motivated by a sense of commitment, opportunity, and advancement. Workers in an organization subscribing to Theory Z learn the business by moving up through the ranks of the company. Ouchi's theory also credits the idea of lifetime employment. Workers will stay with one company until they retire because they are dedicated to the company, which is in turn dedicated to them. EXAM TIP If you need a way to keep McGregor's X and Y and Ouchi's Z theories separate in your mind, think of this: X is bad;Y is good; Z is the best. Vroom's Expectancy Theory Vroom's Expectancy Theory states that people will behave based on what they expect as a result of their behavior. In other words, people will work in relation to the expected reward of the work. If the attractiveness of the reward is desirable to the worker, she will work to receive it. In other words, people expect to be rewarded for their effort. McClelland's Theory of Needs David McClelland developed his acquired-needs theory based on his belief that a person's needs are acquired and develop over time. These needs are shaped by circumstance, conditions, and life experiences for each individual. McClelland's Theory of Needs is also known as the Three Needs Theory because there are just three needs for 09-ch09.indd 362 7/12/2013 4:50:50 AM All-in-1 / CAPM/PMP Project Management Certification All-in-One / Phillips / 177604-4 Chapter 9: Managing Project Human Resources 363 each individual. Depending on the person's experiences, the order and magnitude of each need shifts: * Need for Achievement These people need to achieve, so they avoid both low-risk and high-risk situations. Achievers like to work alone or with other high achievers, and they need regular feedback to gauge their achievement and progress. PART II * Need for Affiliation People who have a driving need for affiliation look for harmonious relationships, want to feel accepted by people, and conform to the norms of the project team. * Need for Power People who have a need for power are usually seeking either personal or institutional power. Personal power generally is the ability to control and direct other people. Institutional power is the ability to direct the efforts of others for the betterment of the organization. McClelland developed the Thematic Apperception Test to determine what needs are driving individuals. The test is a series of pictures that the test taker must create a story about. Through the storytelling, the test taker will reveal which need is driving his or her life at that time. Chapter Summary The project manager has to plan for the needed human resources to complete the project work. In addition, the project manager plans for how the human resources will be managed, trained, motivated, and led throughout the duration of the project. The project management team works to identify the roles within the project and their responsibilities, which are the activities needed to complete the project work. The key output of planning for human resources is the staffing management plan, which defines how the project team will be acquired, managed, trained, rewarded for the work, and then released from the project team. The staffing management plan also defines how the project management team will comply with government regulations and will manage team safety concerns. The project team is acquired just as the staffing management plan specifies. The team, however, isn't always selected--it's often preassigned to the project. Sometimes, the project manager gets to negotiate with the functional managers and other project managers to get the best resources possible on the project. When the resources aren't available inside the organization, the project manager often has to deal with contracted help, which means procurement. Some teams all work together in one locale and might huddle in the project's war room. This idea of a co-located team supports ad-hoc conversations, team cohesiveness, and project performance. However, in many cases, the project team is not colocated, and a virtual team is created. Virtual teams allow people with mobility handicaps or travel issues, as well as home office workers, to be actively involved in the project. 09-ch09.indd 363 7/12/2013 4:50:51 AM All-in-1 / CAPM/PMP Project Management Certification All-in-One / Phillips / 177604-4 CAPM/PMP Project Management Certification All-in-One Exam Guide 364 Whatever conditions surround the project team, the project manager must work to develop the team. Team development centers on building team cohesiveness through team-building exercises, training, and team involvement. One team development tool and technique is the creation of ground rules. Ground rules are created and agreed upon by the project team to promote performance within the project. Once ground rules are created, it's up to the project team to enforce them. Through conversations, observations, performance appraisals, conflict management, and the issue log, the project manager will manage the project team. The goal of team management is getting the project done--meaning, it's all about results. Human resource theories, such as Maslow's Hierarchy of Needs, McGregor's Theory of X and Y, Ouchi's Theory Z, and Vroom's Expectancy Theory, all seek to determine what motivates an employee to complete her project tasks. Project managers can use these theories to determine the best approach to motivate or inspire a project team member to elicit the behavior the project manager expects. Key Terms Adjourning Once the project is done, either the team moves onto other assignments as a unit, or the project team is disbanded and individual team members go on to other work. Authority power Project management team members may have authority over other project team members, may have the ability to make decisions, and perhaps even sign approvals for project work and purchases. Coercive power The project manager has the authority to discipline the project team members. This is also known as penalty power. Collaborate/Problem solving This approach confronts the problem head-on and is the preferred method of conflict resolution. Multiple viewpoints and perspectives contribute to the solution. Collective bargaining agreement constraints Contracts and agreements with unions or other employee groups may serve as constraints on the project. Competency This attribute defines what talents, skills, and capabilities are needed to complete the project work. Compromising This approach requires that both parties give up something. Vroom's Expectancy Theory This theory states that people will behave based on what they expect as a result of their behavior. In other words, people will work in relation to the expected reward. Expert power The project manager's authority comes both from experience with the technology the project focuses on and from expertise in managing projects. Forcing power The person with the power makes the decision. 09-ch09.indd 364 7/12/2013 4:50:51 AM All-in-1 / CAPM/PMP Project Management Certification All-in-One / Phillips / 177604-4 Chapter 9: Managing Project Human Resources 365 Formal power The project manager has been assigned the role of project manager by senior management and is in charge of the project. Forming The project team meets and learns about their roles and responsibilities on the project. Little interaction among the project team happens in this stage as the team is learning about the project and project manager. Herzberg's Theory of Motivation Frederick Herzberg's theory of the motivating agents and hygiene agents that affect a person's willingness to excel in his career. PART II Hierarchical organizational chart A chart showing the relationship between superior and subordinate employees, groups, disciplines, and even departments. Human resource plan This plan defines staff acquisition, the timetable for staff acquisition, the staff release plan, training needs for the project team, any organizational compliance issues, rewards and recognitions, and safety concerns for the project team doing the project work. Interpersonal interfaces This organizational interface considers the formal and informal reporting relationships that may exist among the project team members. The interpersonal interface also considers the job descriptions of the project team members, existing reporting structures between supervisors and subordinates, and existing relationships, if any, that may affect the project work. This interface also considers any cultural or language differences among the project team that may need to be addressed. Issue log A logbook of the issues the project team has identified and dates as to when the issues must be resolved by. The issue log may also include team members or stakeholders who are responsible for finding a solution to the identified issues. Logistical interfaces The logistics of the team locale, time zones, geographical boundaries, and travel requirements within a project. Maslow's Hierarchy of Needs Abraham Maslow's theory of the five needs all humans have and work toward. McClelland's Theory of Needs David McClelland developed this theory, which states our needs are acquired and developed by our experiences over time. All people are, according to this theory, driven by one of three needs: achievement, affiliation, or power. McGregor's Theory of X and Y Douglas McGregor's theory that states management views workers in the Y category as competent and self-led and workers in the X category as incompetent and needing to be micromanaged. Multicriteria Decision Analysis A method to rate potential project team members based on criteria such as education, experience, skills, knowledge, and more. Norming Project team members go about getting the project work, begin to rely on one another, and generally complete their project assignments. 09-ch09.indd 365 7/12/2013 4:50:51 AM All-in-1 / CAPM/PMP Project Management Certification All-in-One / Phillips / 177604-4 CAPM/PMP Project Management Certification All-in-One Exam Guide 366 Organization chart Traditional chart that depicts how the organization is broken down by department and disciplines. This chart is sometimes called the organizational breakdown structure (OBS) and is arranged by departments, units, or teams. Organizational interfaces The project management team needs to identify which departments are going to be involved in the project. Organizational structure constraint The structure of the organization has a direct correlation to the amount of power a project manager has within a project. Ouchi's Theory Z William Ouchi's theory is based on the participative management style of the Japanese. This theory states that workers are motivated by a sense of commitment, opportunity, and advancement. Performing If a project team can reach the performing stage of team development, they trust one another, work well together, and issues and problems get resolved quickly and effectively. Political interfaces The hidden goals, personal agendas, and alliances among the project team members and the stakeholders. RACI chart A RACI chart is a matrix chart that only uses the activities of responsible, accountable, consult, and inform. Referent power The project team personally knows the project manager. Referent can also mean that the project manager refers to the person who assigned him the position. Resource breakdown structure (RBS) This hierarchical chart can decompose the project by the type of resources used throughout it. Responsibility assignment matrix (RAM) A RAM chart shows the correlation between project team members and the work they've been assigned to complete. Responsibility A responsibility is the work that a role performs. Reward The project manager has the authority to reward the project team. Role This denotes what a person is specifically responsible for in a project. Roles are usually tied to job titles, such as network engineer, mechanical engineer, and electrician. Smoothing This approach smooths out the conflict by minimizing the perceived size of the problem. It is a temporary solution, but can calm team relations and boisterous discussions. Staffing management plan A subsidiary plan of the project management plan that defines staff acquisition, timetables, release criteria, training needs, reward and recognition systems, compliance issues, and safety concerns for the project. Storming The project team struggles for project positions, leadership, and project direction. The project team can become hostile toward the project leader, challenge ideas, and try to establish and claim positions about the project work. The amount of 09-ch09.indd 366 7/12/2013 4:50:51 AM All-in-1 / CAPM/PMP Project Management Certification All-in-One / Phillips / 177604-4 Chapter 9: Managing Project Human Resources 367 debate and fury can vary depending on if the project team is willing to work together, the nature of the project, and the control of the project manager. Technical interfaces The project team identifies the disciplines and specialties that the project will require to complete the project scope statement. The technical interfaces are the resources that will be doing the project work. Withdrawal This conflict resolution method sees one side of the argument walking away from the problem, usually in disgust. PART II Questions 1. You are the project manager for the JHG Project. This project requires coordination with the director of manufacturing, HR, the IT department, and the CIO. This is an example of what type of input to organizational planning?
You are the project manager of the Newton Construction Project. This project will use internal and external employees on your project team. Your project requires an electrician at month 8. This is an example of which of the following?
You are the project manager in an organization with a weak matrix. Your project team will come from three different lines of business within the organization and they are also working on at least two other projects. Who will have the authority in your project?
You are the project manager in your organization. Your project is part of a larger program led by Nancy Whitting. Nancy is a believer of McGregor's Theory of X and Y. Which of the following is an example of Theory X?
You are the project manager of the PLN Project. The team members are somewhat afraid of you as project manager because they see you as management. They know that a negative review from you about their project work will impact their yearly bonus. This is an example of which of the following?
You are the project manager of the MMB Project. The president of the company has spoken to the project team and told them of the confidence 09-ch09.indd 368 7/12/2013 4:50:51 AM All-in-1 / CAPM/PMP Project Management Certification All-in-One / Phillips / 177604-4 Chapter 9: Managing Project Human Resources 369 and respect he has in you to lead the project to a successful completion. The project manager has what type of power on this project?
You are the project manager of the Holson Implementation Project for your company. It's come to your attention that three of your project team members are in a disagreement about the direction the project work should take. This disagreement is stalling the project schedule and causing the other project team members to become uncomfortable. You need to resolve this situation quickly and professionally. Which problem-solving technique is the best for most project management situations?
Harold is an outspoken project team member. All of the project team members respect Harold for his experience with the technology, but often things have to go in Harold's favor, otherwise the team's in for a bumpy ride. During a discussion on a solution, a project team member waves her arms and says, "Fine, Harold, do it your way." This is an example of which of the following?
There are several management theories that you should understand for your PMI exam and for your role as a project manager. Which theory believes that workers need to be involved with the management process?
You need a method to keep workers motivated and inspired on your project. This project has many conditions that the project team sees as unfavorable, but they do like you as a project manager. ___________________ states that as long as workers are rewarded, they will remain productive.
You are the project manager for GHB Project. You have served as a project manager for your organization for the past ten years. Practically all of your projects come in on time and on budget. The project team has worked with you in the past, and they consider you to be an expert project manager. They also like working with you. Given all of this, you likely have what type of power on this project?
You are the project manager for your organization and it's come to your attention that some of the project team members are in disagreement with the senior network engineer about the installation of some equipment. You need PART II to resolve this situation quickly before the project stalls any longer. Which of the following is an example of coercive power?
Mike is the project manager for a project with a very tight schedule. The project is running late, and Mike feels that he does not have time to consider all the possible solutions that two team members are in disagreement over. He quickly decides to go with the team member with the largest amount of seniority. This is an example of which of the following?
You are the project manager of the BlueSky Network Upgrade Project. You have 15 project team members and you're speaking with them about the importance of communication. You show them the communication model and give examples of each of the components of the model. One of the project team members asks for an example of noise. Of the following, which one is an example of noise?
You are the project manager for the KLN Project. You had 19 stakeholders on this project and have added three team members to the project. How many more communication channels do you have now compared with before?
A memo has been sent to you, the project manager, the project team members, and the project customers from the project sponsor. In this instance, who is the sender?
Beth is a project manager for her organization and she is working with the stakeholders to develop a communications management plan. She wants to acknowledge the assumptions and constraints in the project. Which one of the following is an example of a project communication constraint?
There are many terms that you'll need to know for your PMI examination that deal with project communications. Of the following, which term describes the pitch and tone of an individual's voice?
You are presenting your project performance to your key stakeholders. Several of the stakeholders are receiving phone calls during your presentation, and this is distracting people from your message. This is an example of what?
Gary is the project manager of the HBA Update Project and his company has hired you as a project management consultant. Gary is confused about the timing of some of the project management processes. In particular, Gary doesn't understand the concept, purpose, and timing of the lessons learned documentation. He asks for your help. When does lessons learned identification take place?
Gary is the project manager of the HBA Update Project and his company has hired you as a project management consultant. Gary is confused about the timing of some of the project management processes. He now has a good understanding of the lessons learned purpose, but he's still confused about why you've recommended that the project team participate in the lessons learned documentation, too. Why should a project team complete lessons learned documentation?
Performance reporting should generally provide information on all of the following except for which one?
You are the project manager of a project that will last 18 months and includes three different countries. As part of your communications management plan you've scheduled face-to-face meetings with the project team and you're PART II utilizing web conferencing software for the virtual team. Based on this information, the process of sending information from the project manager to the project team is called what?
George is the project manager of the 7YH Project. In this project, George considers the relationship between himself and the customer to be of utmost importance. Which one of the following is a valid reason for George's belief in the importance of this relationship?
You are the project manager for your company and you're working with the project team to develop the project's communication management plan. The project team is confused about some of the communication terms. Basically, they want to know how communication actually happens and how you can prove the communication was effective. Which one of the following means that communications occur?
Mary and Thomas are project managers for their organization and they're discussing risk management and risk responses. Thomas insists that an organization should never accept a project risk and Mary says that sometimes it's okay. They've called on you, a project management expert, to help with this decision. When is it appropriate to accept a project risk?
You are a project manager consultant for the Allen T1 Company and you're helping them create a risk management plan for their project management office. You're explaining the concept of risk tolerance and how it affects the risk management policies. An organization's risk tolerance is also known as what?
The customers of the project have requested additions to the project scope. The project manager notifies you that additional risk planning will need to be added to the project schedule. Why? 11-ch11.indd 443 7/10/2013 1:55:43 AM All-in-1 / CAPM/PMP Project Management Certification All-in-One / Phillips / 177604-4 CAPM/PMP Project Management Certification All-in-One Exam Guide 444
Jason is the project manager for his organization and he's working with his project team to identify and analyze project risks. Jason begins to create a risk register as part of this process, but his team doesn't understand what a risk register is or its purpose. Which one of the following best describes the risk register?
You are a project management consultant for the Steinberg Organization and you're helping them categorize risks they may encounter in their projects. For starters, you identify some basic risk categories but your client wants to see some examples of these categories. You tell them, for example, that _______________________ include(s) fire, theft, or injury, and offer(s) no chance for gain.
Complete this sentence: A project risk is a(n) ______________________ occurrence that can affect the project for good or bad.
Bradley is the project manager for his organization and he's working with his project team to identify risks. Some of the project team members are confused as to when risk identification should happen in the project. When should risk identification happen?
Ruth is a project management expert and consultant for businesses creating project management offices. Ruth's current client wants help to better identify risks. Which one of the following is an acceptable tool for risk identification?
You are the project manager for a project that will create a new and improved web site for your company. Currently, your company has over 8 million users around the globe. You would like to poll experts within your organization with a simple, anonymous form asking about any foreseeable risks in the design, structure, and intent of the web site. With the collected information, subsequent anonymous polls are submitted to the group of experts. This is an example of _________________________________.
Alice is a project manager for her organization and she's working with the project team to identify project risks and rank them by impact and probability. Which risk analysis technique provides the project manager with a risk ranking?
A table of risks, their probability, impact, and a number representing the overall risk score is called a ____________________________. 11-ch11.indd 445 7/10/2013 1:55:43 AM All-in-1 / CAPM/PMP Project Management Certification All-in-One / Phillips / 177604-4 CAPM/PMP Project Management Certification All-in-One Exam Guide 446
You are presented with the following table: Risk Event Probability Impact Cost/Benefit EMV 1 .20 -4,000 2 .50 5,000 3 .45 -300 4 .22 500 5 .35 -4,500 What is the EMV for Risk Event 3?
You are presented with the following table: Risk Event Probability Impact Cost/Benefit Ex$V 1 .35 -4,000 2 .40 50,000 3 .45 -300,000 4 .30 50,000 5 .35 -45,000 Based on the preceding numbers, what is the amount needed for the contingency fund?
The water sanitation project manager has determined that the risks associated with handling certain chemicals are too high. He has decided to allow someone else to complete this portion of the project, and so has outsourced the handling and installation of the chemicals and filter equipment to an experienced contractor. This is an example of which of the following?
A project manager and the project team are actively monitoring the pressure gauge on a piece of equipment. Sarah, the engineer, recommends a series of steps to be implemented should the pressure rise above 80 percent. The 80 PART II percent mark represents what?
You are presented with the following table: Risk Event Probability Impact Cost/Benefit Ex$V 1 .20 -4,000 2 .50 5,000 3 .45 -300 4 .22 500 5 .35 -4,500 6 What would Risk Event 6 be, based on the following information: Marty is 60 percent certain that he can get the facility needed for $45,000, which is $7,000 less than what was planned for.
You are the project manager for your organization and you're working with the project team to identify the project risks, rank the risks on probability and impact, and then create a risk contingency reserve. As part of these processes, you want to explore multiple scenarios of risk events in the project so you're utilizing different tools to analyze the project risks. Based on this information, which of the following can determine multiple scenarios, given various risks and the probability of their impact?
You are the project manager of the Adams Construction Project. Some of the work in the project contains pure risk that you're not willing to accept. You decided to mitigate the pure risks in this project. Which of the following may be used as a risk mitigation tool?
Britney is the project manager of the FTG Software Project. She's relying on the project scope to help her analyze the procurement needs of the project. The project scope statement can help a project manager create procurement details. Which one of the following best describes this process?
You are creating a new contract for some procured work in the project. Your manager wants you to define how issues and claims will be resolved including the possibility of any lawsuits related to the procured work. The United States backs all contracts through which of the following?
Terry is the project manager of the MVB Project. She needs to purchase a piece of equipment for her project. The accounting department has informed Terry that she needs a unilateral form of contract. Accounting is referring to which of the following?
You are a project management consultant for the Hopson Company and you're working with them to determine the best vendor and contract choice for a portion of their project. The purpose of a contract is to distribute between the buyer and seller a reasonable amount of what?
You are the project manager of the Communications Projects for your organization. Management has stressed that you use privity throughout this project. Privity is what?
Sammy is the project manager of the DSA Project. He is considering proposals and contracts presented by vendors for a portion of the project work. Of the following, which contract is least risky to the DSA Project from Sammy's perspective? PART II
Bradley is the project manager of the Warehouse Remodeling Project for his company. He is in the process of determining which contracts to use in this project. His company is risk-averse, so the correct choice of contract is important to Bradley. Of the following contract types, which one requires the seller to assume the risk of cost overruns?
Mary is the project manager of the JHG Project. She has created a procurement statement of work (SOW) for a vendor. What project component is the procurement statement of work based on?
You are the project manager for a software development project for an accounting system that will operate over the Internet. Based on your research, you have discovered that it will cost you $25,000 to write your own code. 12-ch12.indd 485 7/12/2013 4:55:31 AM All-in-1 / CAPM/PMP Project Management Certification All-in-One / Phillips / 177604-4 CAPM/PMP Project Management Certification All-in-One Exam Guide 486 Once the code is written, you estimate you'll spend $3,000 per month updating the software with client information, government regulations, and maintenance. A vendor has proposed to write the code for your company and charge a fee based on the number of clients using the program every month. The vendor will charge you $5 per month per user of the web-based accounting system. You will have roughly 1,200 clients using the system per month. However, you'll need an in-house accountant to manage the time and billing of the system, so this will cost you an extra $1,200 per month. How many months will you have to use the system before it is better to write your own code than to hire the vendor?
Henry has been negotiating with the ABN Contracting Company for two weeks regarding some procured work on the project. Henry has sent the ABN Contracting Company a letter of intent. This means what?
Martha is the project manager of the MNB Project. She wants a vendor to offer her one price to do all of the detailed work. Martha will issue which type of document?
You are the project manager for your company and you have six vendors on your project. You've worked with the vendors collectively to organize and schedule their overlapping work, scope control, and changes within their contract requirements. You have created many procurement documents in this project. Which one of the following is true about procurement documents?
You are the project manager of the SRQ City Network Project for your company. You will be managing the selection of several vendors to participate in this process and your project team wants to know when seller selection actually happens. In what process group does the select seller event happen?
There are some risks that you can do little about. In your most recent project, for example, a tornado has wrecked your construction project. The tornado is known as what?
You are the project manager of the GUY Project for your organization. This project has recently been chartered and you're starting the process of stakeholder identification. In this process, you're working with your project team, some of the known stakeholders, and your project sponsor. Which one of the following inputs will you NOT need for the stakeholder identification process?
Beth is the project manager for a large health care project. She is working with the project sponsor to define the steps she'll use to perform stakeholder analysis. Which of the following correctly defines the steps for stakeholder analysis? 13-ch13.indd 513 7/12/2013 4:58:21 AM All-in-1 / CAPM/PMP Project Management Certification All-in-One / Phillips / 177604-4 CAPM/PMP Project Management Certification All-in-One Exam Guide 514
You are the project manager for your organization. Management has asked you to create a stakeholder classification model to show the amount of authority stakeholders have over project decisions in relation to how much their political capital and position in the company could affect the project. What type of stakeholder classification model should you create?
Henry has been tasked to create a salience model for his project. This model defines three characteristics for project stakeholders. Which one of the following is NOT one of the three characteristics of the stakeholders mapped in the salience model?
You are the project manager of a large technology project for your company. This project will span the United States and parts of Europe. There are key stakeholders in all countries represented. As part of your stakeholder analysis you'd like to create a document that captures all of the stakeholders' contact information, assessment information, and classification in the project. What type of document are you creating?
Terry is the project manager of the ARB project for his company. Terry approaches Scott for his insight about the schedule for releasing the product the project will create. Scott doesn't know anything about the project Terry is working on and is surprised to learn about the product. What type of stakeholder is Scott?
You are a project management consultant for your company and you're meeting the stakeholders for the first time. Mary, a stakeholder, tells you that she hates the project and she hopes that it fails miserably. What type of stakeholder is Mary?
You are the project manager of the HQL Project for your company. Henry, a stakeholder, is in favor of your project and he's working with you to express the importance of the project. Henry has offered to help with the project, communicate with other stakeholders, and host status meetings. What type of stakeholder is Henry?
Sammy is the project manager of the KHG Project. Some of the stakeholders in this project are opposed to the project, some are in favor of the project, and some stakeholders are neutral. Management has asked Sammy to create a chart that shows the current status of engagement for each stakeholder and the desired level of engagement for each stakeholder. What type of chart is management asking for?
You are the project manager of the GUY Project for your company and you're working with your project team on some stakeholder issues. You want to examine the interrelationships among the project stakeholders for better communications. What project management plan will you refer to?
Holly is a new project manager and she's confused about the need for the change log and how it relates to the stakeholder engagement. Why is the change log an input to the management stakeholder engagement process?
Part of stakeholder management is the reliance on interpersonal skills. Which one of the following is an interpersonal skill?
Just as you need interpersonal skills, you'll also need management skills to effectively engage the stakeholders in the project. Which one is a management skill?
As a PMP and CAPM candidate, you should be familiar with the inputs, tools and techniques, and outputs of the project management process. The management of stakeholder engagement creates five outputs. Which one of the following is not an output of the process?
You are coaching several new project managers on effective control of stakeholder engagement. The project managers are confused as to why change requests come from this process. What is the most likely type of change that will come from controlling stakeholder engagements?
Ned is the project manager of the NHQ Project and he's meeting with a few key stakeholders to determine their roles, interests, concerns, influence, and attitude about the project. What type of meeting is Ned hosting?
What type of communication is happening in a meeting with several stakeholders exchanging ideas?
You are the project manager of a large construction project. You have created a website that allows the different functional managers to log in to a secured area, run queries, and generate reports on the time, cost, scope, changes, risks, and human resource aspects of your project. What type of communication is this?
Which one of the following examples best describes a push communication?
Your project has 45 stakeholders as of today. You've just learned that next week 29 new stakeholders will be joining the project. How many more communication channels will you have next week?
You are the project manager of the JKN Project. The project customer has requested that you inflate your cost estimates by 25 percent. He reports that his management always reduces the cost of the estimates, so this is the only 14-ch14.indd 535 7/10/2013 2:00:10 AM All-in-1 / CAPM/PMP Project Management Certification All-in-One / Phillips / 177604-4 CAPM/PMP Project Management Certification All-in-One Exam Guide 536 method to get the monies needed to complete the project. Which of the following is the best response to this situation?
You are the project manager for the BNH Project. This project takes place in a different country than where you are from. The project leader from this country presents a team of workers that are only from his family. What should you do?
You are the project manager of the SUN Project. Your organization is a functional environment, and you do not get along well with the functional manager leading the project. You disagree with the manager on how the project should proceed, the timings of the activities, the suggested schedule, and the expected quality of the work. The manager has requested that you get to work on several of the activities on the critical path even though you and she have not solved the issues concerning the project. What should you do? PART II
The PMI has contacted you regarding an ethics violation of a PMP candidate. The question is in regard to a friend who said he worked as a project manager under your guidance. You know this is not true, but to save a friendship, you avoid talking with the PMI. This is a violation of what?
As a contracted project manager, you have been assigned a project with a budget of $1.5 million. The project is scheduled to last seven months, but your most recent earned value management (EVM) report shows that the project will finish ahead of schedule by nearly six weeks. If this happens, you will lose $175,000 in billable time. What should you do?
You are the project manager of the 12BA Project. You have completed the project according to the design documents and have met the project scope. 14-ch14.indd 538 7/10/2013 2:00:10 AM All-in-1 / CAPM/PMP Project Management Certification All-in-One / Phillips / 177604-4 Chapter 14: Understanding the Code of Ethics and Professional Conduct 539 The customer agrees that the design document requirements have been met; however, the customer is not pleased with the project deliverables and is demanding additional adjustments be made to complete the project. What is the best way to continue?
You are completing a project for a customer in another country. One of the customs in this country is to honor the project manager of a successful project with a gift. Your company, however, does not allow project managers to accept gifts worth more than $50 from any entity. At the completion of the project, the customer presents you with a new car in a public ceremony. What should you do?
Your project depends on two business partners, On The Fly Inc. (OTF) and The Sure Thing Inc. (ST), delivering their products to you on time. The chances are three out of four that OTF will make the delivery in time and two out of three that ST will not make the delivery on time. The probability that OTF and ST will both deliver on time is equal to:
You are being interviewed by a functional manager, who says, "We have this huge undertaking of launching an online education website that contains different components, such as designing the website, developing the content, developing the administrative system including registration and payment, marketing the courses on the website, integrating different components of the website, and finally going live. Each component is functionally complex and large enough that it will be better served under a different management." The manager is most likely describing a:
Select each of the following that is a project management knowledge area.
What is not true about the project management processes?
In which of the following organizational structures does the project manager have the lowest authority?
Check each that is the correct representation of PMI talent triangle:
Strategic and business management skills include all of the following except:
Technical project management skills include the abilities to: (Check all that apply.)
You have been named the project manager for a project in your company codenamed Kill the Bill. The project must be completed before Thanksgiving Day this year. This represents which of the following project characteristics?
A data presentation model that presents a stakeholder's influence, impact, and interest in one plot is called a:
You are the project manager of a project named Teach the Congress. Your friend Cosmo is a project manager of a project that shares some resources with your project. What kind of influence does Cosmo have on project Teach the Congress?
What document is not the result of the project initiation process group?
Which of the following is a false statement about the output of the Plan Scope Management process that creates the project scope management plan?
What document is the result of the integration of the management knowledge area with the project planning process group?
Which of the following are the input documents for the Develop Project Management Plan process?
Consider the following network diagram. Which of the following is the critical path? 196 Chapter 5 | Planning for Project Schedule Management
You use a three-point estimate for activity duration estimating. An activity has a duration of 9 days for an optimistic scenario, 18 days for a pessimistic scenario, and 12 days for the most-likely scenario. Which of the following will you take as the duration estimate if a weight of 4 is assigned to the most-likely scenario as compared to the weight of 1 for each of the optimistic and pessimistic scenarios?
Your supervisor has asked you to put a contingency reserve into your project plans. Which of the following is not true about contingency reserves?
The cost of a project activity is estimated to be $500 with 10% accuracy. What is the estimated range of the cost?
Which of the following is not listed as an input item in PMBOK to developing the cost management plan?
You are a project manager at a company that is a seller for another company. You are coordinating efforts to bid on a contract with the other company to sell the product of your company. Which of the following contract types carries the most risk for your company?
Your organization is playing the seller role in doing a part of a project for another company, the buyer. The buyer has incomplete specifications for the work involved at this stage and wants you to start the work after signing the agreement. Which of the following contract types will be the most beneficial for your organization?
Which of the following is not an information-gathering technique listed in PMBOK, Sixth Edition for use in the risk identification process?
You are managing a project to set up data servers to support a website for an enterprise customer. The location for the servers has been placed close to the customer due to their requirements. However, this location is prone to natural disasters, such as hurricanes and flooding. You have decided to install some extra servers in another city that will act as backup if a disaster happens. This is an example of which of the following?
Consider Figure 7-6. Assume that the risk has a 50 percent probability of occurring. If the risk does occur, it could have a positive or a negative impact equivalent to $200,000 or $50,000, respectively, with the probabilities shown in the figure. 308 Chapter 7 | Planning Quality and Risk Management Figure 7-6. Example of positive and negative risk impact What is the EMV for the positive impact?
Consider Figure 7-6. Assume that the risk has a 50 percent probability of occurring. If the risk does occur, it could have a positive or a negative impact equivalent to $200,000 or $50,000, respectively, with the probabilities shown in the figure. What is the EMV for the risk?
What about matrix diagrams is not true:
What about quality metrics is not true:
You have just joined a project that has already been planned. You want to take a look at strategies to implement and actions to perform to facilitate stakeholders' creative involvement in the project, such as making project decisions and project execution. Where you will look?
Which of the following communication skills are necessary for a project manager? a) Listening, b) negotiating, c) resolving conflict, d) pursuing a team, e) setting expectations (Select the most correct answer):
Which of the following is not a part of communications?
The process or processes used to learn lessons from projects are:
You are the project manager for the Mind The Gap project. You are going to meet with your project team, where you are going to develop quality tests that incorporate the organization's quality policies and procedures. Which of the following processes are you performing?
The seller proposals, an input item for Conduct Procurement, is created during which process?
You are the project manager for the ABC project.You are going to meet with your project team to discuss how to ensure that the project will be completed without any deviations from the project requirements. Which of the following processes are you performing?
Which of the following is generally the best conflict-resolution technique to use to resolve conflict in your team in most situations?
Which of the following is not a standard tool or technique you need in order to acquire a project team?
Pam Cruise, the engineering manager, receives daily progress reports from all engineers she manages. She also visits the cubicles of the engineers several times a day to ensure that they are working and not just browsing the Web. Most of the engineers agree that she is a micromanager. What kind of management theory is she applying?
Susan Travis, the project manager, receives weekly progress reports from all engineers she manages. She rewards the achievements of her employees and always gives credit to her employees for their accomplishments. She is always interested in mentoring her team members and putting them on a career path. She also helps the good performers get the assignments and projects of their choice.
Which one of the following items will be certainly updated as result of the Manage Communication process?
You have created the work performance report about the project that you are managing. Which process will you use to distribute the report among the stakeholders?
What of the following is an output item of the Manage Stakeholder Engagement process?
Walking down the hallway, you hear a program manager saying to a project manager, "You need the performance reports to run this process." To which process might the program manager be referring?
You are managing a software project with limited development resources. The QA department has discovered a large number of defects in the product, and the project sponsor is very concerned about this. You want to get the maximum number of defects repaired with minimal effort and cost. Which quality-control tool are you going to use before you direct the efforts of the project team to fixing specific problems?
Which of the following tools or techniques is not listed in PMBOK to be used in the Control Quality process?
A project manager is getting risk-related recommended corrective actions recommended by his team. In which of the following processes is the project manager involved?
Which of the following is the correct order in which to perform the listed processes?
Which of the following shows the correct order in which to perform the listed processes for the first time?
Which of the following is the correct order of running processes (choose all that apply)?
You have developed the schedule for your project, and you've called the kickoff meeting. A team member who is responsible for an activity comes to you and tells you that the activity cannot be performed within the allocated time because some pieces were left out during activity definition.The revised estimate will add two more days to the activity duration, but the activity is not on the critical path. Which of the following actions will you take?
Your project sponsor has asked you to ensure that allotted resources are used, unused resources are immediately released, and no unplanned resources should be allotted. To ensure that, which process would you run?
There is a CPI value of 1.25 and an SPI value of 1.33 for a project. This means which of the following?
You are managing a project in biotechnology code named Mitochondria Eve.You need work performance measurements or information to write the performance reports. Which process(es) will you run?
Walking down the hallway, you hear a program manager saying to a project manager, "You need the performance reports to run this process." Which process is the program manager likely referring to?
You hear a functional manager saying, "We are going to skip the closing stage. There is no need for formalities in this project; it's a total waste of time." For which kind of projects is it appropriate to skip the closing stage?
Which of the following are not an activity of the Close Project process?
Which two of the following are the essential characteristics that make a group of activities a project? (Choose two.)
Which of the following is not a process group?
Which of the following is not included in the preliminary scope statement?
Which of the following lists the documents in the order they are written?
You have been named the project manager for a project in your company codenamed Thank You Mr. Glad. The project must complete before Thanksgiving Day this year. This represents which of the following project characteristics?
Which of the following is true about assumptions in the project planning?
Your company runs a Web site that makes digital music downloads available to end users. You have been assigned a project that involves adding parental guidance warnings to various downloads. This project originated due to which of the following?
Which of the following is not a constraint common to all the projects?
You are managing a project to set up data servers to support a Web site for an enterprise customer. The location for the servers has been chosen close to the customer due to their requirements. However, this location is prone to natural disasters, such as hurricanes and flooding. You have decided to install some redundant servers in another city that will act as backup if a disaster happens. This is an example of which of the following?
Consider the following figure. It shows a risk with a 50% probability of occurrence. If the risk does occur, it could have a positive or a negative impact equivalent to $200,000 or $50,000, respectively, with the probabilities shown in the figure. What is the EMV for the positive impact?
Consider the following figure. It shows a risk with a 50% probability of occurrence. If the risk does occur, it could have a positive or a negative impact equivalent to $200,000 or $50,000, respectively, with the probabilities shown in the figure. What is the EMV for the risk?
Which of the following is not an output of the qualitative risk analysis?
Which of the following is not an output of the quantitative risk analysis?
Which of the following is the most widely used network diagramming method?
In your research project on tourism, you must collect data before the tourist season ends because the project involves interviewing the tourists. The data-collection activity has which of the following kind of dependency?
You know from a network diagram that activity B cannot start until activity A is finished. Which of the following are true?
You have developed the schedule for your project and you've called the kickoff meeting. A team member who is responsible for an activity comes to you and tells you that the activity cannot be performed within the allocated time because some pieces were left out during activity definition. The revised estimate will add two more days to the activity duration, but the activity is not on the critical path. Which of the following actions will you take?
What is the float for activity G in the network diagram in question 11?
What is the length of the critical path in the network diagram shown in question 11?
You use a three-point estimate for activity duration estimating. An activity has a duration of nine days for an optimistic scenario, 18 days for a pessimistic scenario, and 12 days for the most likely scenario. Which of the following will you take as the duration estimate for this activity?
Which of the following is not an input item to the activity definition process?
The management has asked you to produce a chart that depicts the resource needs for all the activities in the project. Which of the following charts is the management referring to?
Which of the following is not an output of the human resource planning process?
Which of the following is not the input to the QA process?
In procurement, which of the following contract types presents the highest risk for the seller?
The analysis to make a buy or make decision is performed during which of the following stages of procurement?
You are managing a software project. The project is already in the execution stage when you discover that a whole software module is missing from the work breakdown structure. Your company does not have the programmers to write the module in a timely fashion, so you decide to procure this piece of work. The module will have a number of small programs working together, and it will take almost the same effort to write any of these programs. The software experts have given you an estimate for the effort. However, it is not clear at this stage how many programs will be needed. Which type of contract will you choose in this situation?
Your company is outsourcing a part of your project, and therefore preparing the procurement documents. Which of the following is true about the procurement documents?
Your organization is playing the seller role in doing a part of the project for another company, the buyer. The buyer has incomplete specifications for the work involved and wants you to start the work immediately after signing the agreement. Which of the following contract types will be the most beneficial for your organization?
You are the project manager for the ABC project. You are going to meet with your project team to discuss how to ensure that the project will be completed without any deviations from the project requirements. Which of the following processes are you performing?
Which of the following is not a situation well-suited for team development efforts?
You are using an Ishikawa diagram to find real causes of a problem by exploring all the possible causes. Which quality process are you performing?
You are managing a software project with limited development resources. The QA department has discovered a large number of defects in the product, and the project sponsor is very concerned about this. You want to get the maximum number of defects repaired with minimal efforts. Which quality-control tool are you going to use before you direct the efforts of the project team to fix specific problems?
You are the project manager for a software development project that has limited resources. The customer is concerned with the quality of the code developed and wants you to conduct the code review. The product contains a large body of code with millions of lines. Which approach will you take?
A project manager is recommending corrective actions related to risk. Which of the following processes is the project manager involved in?
You are the project manager for a software product and your project is in the execution stage. You have learned that Maya, a developer, has started adding some new features to the deliverable she is working on. What is the best action for you to take?
At which stage has a successful project arrived when the closing process starts?
For which kind of projects it is appropriate to skip the closing stage?
Which of the following is not an activity of the administrative closure of a project?
Which of the following is not an input to the close project process?
Which of the following is not an output of the close project process?
Which of the following processes is used to close out the project work portion of a project?
The lessons learned are an output of which closing processes? (Choose two.)
You have applied for the PMP exam, and you are attending a training session for the exam offered by a PMP who proudly poses a number of questions to the audience and claims that these are the questions in the real exam. What should you do? (Choose one.)
You are managing a project in a country foreign to you. The project sponsor asks you to write a check to a city official to get some paperwork required for the project moving forward. Such an activity in your home country would be considered bribery, which is illegal. What should you do?
You are managing a project in a country foreign to you. The project sponsor asks you to write a check to a city official to get some paperwork required for the project moving forward. She confesses that it is, as a matter of fact, bribery and is technically illegal, but it is a very common and acceptable practice in this country. What should you do?
You are managing a project in a country foreign to you and the project is in the planning stage. The project sponsor asks you to inflate the cost estimate by 30 percent. He says, "We're not in Kansas anymore, buddy; if you want to get the license for a pistol here, you would have to apply for a machine gun." He insists that this is the only way he can get the required money because the management always reduces the estimate before allotting the money. Which of the following is the best step you could take?
You are the project manager of a project that needs to procure a bunch of activities as a subproject due to the lack of skills in the organization. Your sister-in-law owns a firm that specializes in the area of the activities that need to be procured. She has shown an interest in this procurement. Which of the following steps would be the best to take?
Which two of the following are not expected by the PMP Code of Professional Conduct? (Remember, choose two.)
You are the project manager for a project that involves procurement. Multiple vendors bid for the work to be procured. The cost estimate from Best Deals is significantly higher than from any other vendor. Which of the following is an appropriate action to take?
You are the project manager for the Peace in the City project. You have learned that three of the stakeholders have started fighting over the scope of the project. What step will you take?
You have taken over a project which is already in the executing stage. You discover that some of the milestones still in progress have been reported as completed to the senior management by the previous project manager in the status reports. Which of the following is the best first step to take?
You are hired as a project manager for a company. Which of the following is not your responsibility?
Your project depends on two business partners: On The Fly, Inc. (OTF) and The Sure Thing, Inc. (ST) delivering their products to you on time. The chances are three out of four that OTF will make the delivery on time and two out of three that ST will not make the delivery on time. The probability that OTF and ST will both deliver on time is equal to:
You are being interviewed by a functional manager who says, "We have this huge undertaking of launching an online education website that contains different components, such as designing the website; developing the content; developing the administrative system, including registration and payment; marketing the courses on the website; integrating different components of the website; and finally going live. Each component is functionally complex and large enough that it will be better served under a different management." The manager is most likely describing a:
Effective project management requires that a project manger must have the following characteristics:
The role of a project manager is more of a coordinator or an expediter in organizations with the following structures:
The project manager is responsible for achieving project objectives in an organization with the following structure:
You are preparing to develop the project charter for a project codenamed Plum Dog Millionaire. As part of this effort, you are studying the project statement of work. You must be able to find the following three elements that the SOW includes or refers to:
Which of the following is not a constraint common to the projects?
You are trying to understand the message sent to you by one of your team member who lives on the other side of the globe. The team member has used lots of local phrases and acronyms that you are trying to understand. According to the basic communication model, what are you dealing with here?
Consider the following figure. Assume that the risk has a 50% probability of occurrence. If the risk does occur, it could have a positive or a negative impact equivalent to $200,000 or $50,000, respectively, with the probabilities shown in the figure. What is the EMV for the positive impact?
Consider the following figure. Assume that the risk has a 50% probability of occurrence. If the risk does occur, it could have a positive or a negative impact equivalent to $200,000 or $50,000, respectively, with the probabilities shown in the figure. What is the EMV for the risk?
Your company is outsourcing a part of your project and therefore is preparing the procurement documents. Which of the following is true about the procurement documents?
You are the project manager of the Green Driving project. Your supervisor has asked you to make some self checks and inspections before the stakeholders ask for a formal inspection. It is time to perform which process?
Shilpa Bedi, the engineering manager, receives daily progress reports from all the engineers she manages. She also visits the cubicles of the engineers several times a day to ensure that they are working and not just browsing the web. Most of the engineers agree that she is a micromanager. What kind of management theory is she applying?
Gary Travis, the engineering manager, receives weekly progress reports from all engineers he manages. He encourages them to take ownership of their assignments. Most of the engineers agree that he trusts his engineers. What kind of management theory is he applying?
Lois Travis, the project manager, receives weekly progress reports from all engineers she manages. She rewards the achievements of her employees and always gives the credit to her employees for their accomplishments. She is always interested in mentoring her team members and putting them on a career path. She also helps the good performers get the assignments and projects of their choice. What kind of management theory is she applying?
The process to monitor and control procurements is called:
The sponsor of your project wants to look at the raw data from executing the project--that is, the work performance information. Which process should you run to get this information?
You are the project manager for a software development project that has limited resources. The customer is concerned about the quality of the code developed and wants you to conduct the code review. The product contains a large body of code with millions of lines. Which approach will you take?
Project managers often talk about the triple constraint. Following are the three elements of the triple constraint:
You are managing a project in a country foreign to you, and the project is in the planning stage. The project sponsor asks you to inflate the cost estimate by 30 percent. He says, "We're not in Kansas anymore, buddy; if you want to get the license for a pistol here, you would have to apply for a machine gun." He insists that this is the only way he can get the required money because management always reduces the estimate before allotting money. Which of the following is the best step you could take?
Which of the following is not expected by the PMP Code of Professional Conduct?
You have taken over a project that is already in the executing stage. You discover that some of the milestones still in progress have been reported as completed to the senior management by the previous project manager in the status reports. Which of the following is the best first step to take?
The four values that make the foundation of the Code of Ethics and Professional Conduct by the PMI are the following:
You are in process of identifying and documenting the project roles and responsibilities and create staffing management plan. All of the following should be addressed when listing the roles and responsibilities EXCEPT:
Reserve analysis is a tool /technique in all of the following processes EXCEPT:
Which of the following are NOT outputs of the Activity Duration Estimation process?
Which of the following statements are FALSE regarding the project scope management plan?
Which of the following statements are TRUE regarding various Activity Scheduling tools?
Which of the following can be used to determine what work is included in each work package for each of your team members?
Which of the following statements are FALSE regarding rolling wave plan?
Which of the following statements are FALSE regarding Expected Monetary Value Analysis (EMV)?
Which of the following describes a group of elated schedule activities aggregated at some summary level, displayed reported as a single activity at summary level?
Which of the following are NOT tools/ techniques of the Activity Definition Process?
You are in process of developing an approximation of the costs of resources needed to complete each schedule activity. Which of the following is the LEAST helpful input?
Planning components are tools/ techniques of the Activity Definition Process. Which of the following are planning components?
You are in process of numerically analyzing the effects of identified risks. Which of the following are NOT tools/ techniques you can use in the process?
Which of the following describes tool/ technique where expenditure of funds is reconciled with the funding limits imposed by the performing organization?
Which of the following situations will cause schedule activity duration estimates to directly influence the cost estimates EXCEPT:
Which of the following statements are FALSE regarding costreimbursable contracts?
You have been hired as a project manager for a small local bank. The banks wants you to design and develop custom online bill pay software so that its customers can pay their bills online. You are ready to begin the activity definition of your project. You have identifies the scope statement, the WBS, and talked with the SME's. In addition, for security reason, you have been informed that project team members must NOT have criminal history with the FICO score of 700 or above. In addition you've requested that the bank purchase the necessary transaction processing software, although the software is not yet available. What else do you need before you begin activity definition?
You are the project manager at a software company developing the next-gen OODBMS (Object Oriented Data Base Management System). As software development can be very chaotic, your company has elected to follow a more rigorous approach to software development. Specifically your company has chosen to adopt the extreme programming XP methodology for your current software project. The XP methodology is highly iterative, and produces numerous deliverables include UML diagrams, architecture diagrams, prototypes and test-cases. Assume you are in the Activity Sequencing phase of the project. Which of the following sequencing methods should you use to identify the logical relationships between tasks, so that the activities can be sequenced correctly?
All of the statements regarding control accounts and planning packages are true EXCEPT:
Reverse analysis is a tool/ technique in all of the following processes EXCEPT:
Your project sponsor has asked you to produce a Risk Management Plan for your current project. Which of the following best describes how you should tailor the plan to your project?
You are the project manager at a manufacturer of electronic components. Your company had been a long time market leader in electronic components distribution industry. However, in recent years, the Internet has transformed the competitive landscape. As a result company's market share has been eroding. Hence, your current project involves implementing the company's internet strategies to best exploit these altered dynamics and increase the company's market share. You commit to completing the project deliverables by this date. Which of the following BEST describes why this is the INCORRECT way to estimate the schedule?
Reverse analysis is a tool/ technique in ll of the following processes EXCEPT:
Monte Carlo analysis is a form of what type of analysis?
You have been hired as a project manager for a small local bank. The bank wants you to design and develop custom online bill pay software so that its customers can pay their bills online. You are ready to begin the Activity Resource Estimation process for your project. Which of the following would you NOT consider when developing the activity resource requirements document?
A project schedule can be presented in various formats. All of the following are valid formats of the project schedule EXCEPT:
All of the following statements are true regarding the Activity Sequencing / Activity Duration Estimation process EXCEPT:
Your project team has already created the WBS, developed estimates for the work packages, and sequenced the project activities using the arrow diagramming method. In addition, your team has applied resource leveling and schedule compression techniques on the project schedule. Which actions should be performed NEXT:
You are the project manager responsible for developing a new hybrid engine for a major auto manufacturer. You are in process of developing the project schedule. In order to manage the uncertainty associated with the project schedule, you intend to do the following: (a) use average task duration estimates; (b) schedule backwards from the date a project is needed (to ensure work that needs to be done is done, and it is done only when it is needed; (c) place aggregate buffers in the project plan to protect the entire project and the key tasks; and (d) use buffer management to control the plan. Which of the following BEST describes the technique you are using?
Which of the following process involves determining project roles, responsibilities, and reporting relationships, and develops the staffing management plan?
Three-point estimates are based on determining three types of estimates. Which of the following is NOT one of these estimates?
Which of the following statements are FALSE regarding project funding requirements?
Which of the following processes involves allocating cost estimates in order to establish a cost baseline for measuring project performance?
Which of the following statements are TRUE regarding various activity scheduling tools?
Which of the following are NOT inputs to the risk identification process?
Which of the following are NOT outputs of the activity duration estimating process?
You are in process of identifying and documenting project risks. You are using various information gathering techniques to identify the project risks. All of the following are information gathering techniques EXCEPT:
Which of the following statements are FALSE regarding Monte Carlo analysis?
You are currently the project manager at rapidly growing retailer of high-end electronics equipment. You have been tasked with the project of expanding business. You are currently evaluating opening retail stores in one of three US-based locations: New York, Seattle, San Francisco. You have been told that the San Francisco market has smaller market potential, but higher probability of success. On the other hand, the New York market has a larger market potential but lower probability of success. And the Seattle market is in between. Your project manager has given you the following forecast. Which of the flowing opportunity is the BEST choice?
You are in process of developing an approved project schedule that will serve as a baseline against which the project can be tracked. Which of the following is needed in order to complete schedule development?
Supporting details for activity cost estimates should include all of the following EXCEPT:
Which of the following statements regarding WBS is false?
Roger works for a manufacturer of automotive engines. He has been recently assigned to supervise and mange the manufacturing of a new model of diesel engine. He informs \roger that his new assignment will be to have 500 units of the new diesel engine manufactured in 60 days. Roger is currently in the process of analyzing activity sequences, activity durations, and resource requirements in order to develop the project schedule. Which of the following processed is Roger performing?
All of the following should be included in the initial staffing management plan as part of Human Resource planning EXCEPT:
You have been recently assigned to provide an accurate project schedule for a large construction company. Your lead engineer has given you the following estimates for several critical path activities. Your stakeholders want you to commit to a completion date for these critical path activities. Which of the following statements are true?
Which of the following are NOT tools/ techniques of the Plan Contracting Process?
You are in process of defining how to plan and execute the risk management activities for your project. Which of the following statements are false?
You are the project manager responsible for developing a new online line bill payment system for a utility company. You are expected to complete the project within the next year. You are currently in the process of identifying and evaluating a number of risks quantifying their impacts and identifying their probability of occurrence. You would like to use a tool that will determine the highest expected value for the various scenarios. Which of the following tools should you use?
The CPM calculates the earliest start date, earliest finish date, and latest finish date for each activity. Which of the following statements are true regarding the critical path of a project schedule?
The risk register is an input to all of the following processes EXCEPT:
You are currently in the process of analyzing activity sequences, duration, resource requirements, and schedule to create the project schedule. Which of the following are not tools/ techniques you can use?
Assumptions analysis, checklist analysis, and risk diagramming techniques are tools/ techniques of which of the following processes?
Which of the following statements are FALSE regarding CPM method?
Which of the following statements are true regarding funding limit reconciliation?
You have been recently assigned to provide an accurate project schedule for a large construction company. You are evaluating the network diagrams for the construction project, and are using backward pass calculations to construct the schedule. You are trying to calculate the latest start time for laying the foundation of building. The expected duration for this task is 180 days. The task must be completed within 300 days, while the expected completion is between 220 days. The latest finish date is 270 days. Based on this information, what is the latest start time of this task?
Which of the following best describes resource leveling?
You are the project manager assigned to install the electrical wiring for a 20,000 square foot office building that is currently under construction. You are trying to estimate the costs of this project. You know from past experience that is costs approximately $3 per square foot to properly wire and entire building. As your building will be 20,000 square feet you estimate that the project will cost approximately $60,000. What type of estimating technique did u used?
You have been recently hired to be a project manager at a bio-tech company to develop a new drug to treat pancreatic cancer. The drug has been under development and clinical testing for past 5 years. The FDA is currently reviewing the clinical data in order to determine weather the drug has any serious side effects. If the FDA does NOT approve the drug, the project will be in trouble. This is an example of which type of risks?
Which of the following are NOT used to create the scope baseline for a project?
Which of the following statements are true regarding the procurement management plan?
You are using three point estimating technique to estimate the duration of a schedule activity. Which of the following statements are true given the following data: Pessimistic: 100 days Optimistic: 40 days Most likely: 65 days Average: 68.33 days Variance: 151.38
You have been recently been assigned to provide an accurate project schedule for a large construction project. You are evaluating the network diagram for the construction project. Your lead engineer has given you following estimates for critical path activity: 30 days (optimistic), 100 days (pessimistic), and 50 days (most likely). What is the standard deviation for this activity, assuming a beta distribution?
Which of the following statements regarding Resource Breakdown structure are true EXCEPT:
You are the project manager for developing a next-generation search engine for internet. Instead of using simple word or link analysis methods, your search engine will use a sophisticated algorithm based on latent semantic indexing. You are in process of creating the detailed project scope statement. All of the following should be included in the detailed project scope statement EXCEPT:
Which of the following statements regarding WBS are FALSE?
Which of the following can be used to display the assigned roles and responsibilities of project team members?
You are in process of creating the detailed project scope statement. All of the following are inputs to this process EXCEPT:
Which of the following statements are FALSE regarding the Resource Calendar?
All of the statements are true regarding Analogous Estimation EXCEPT:
You are currently in process of prioritizing risks by their impact and probability of occurrence. The risk register updates from this process include all of the following EXCEPT:
The WBS is an input to all of the processes EXCEPT:
You are the project manager for a software company that develops stock analysis software. You have been assigned to assigned to develop a new technical analysis tool to forecast to price of a stock given this historical volatility based on Elliot Wave technique. You need to gather the necessary information to write the project scope management plan. Which of the following information do you NOT need as inputs to your current process?
All of the following statements are true regarding the critical path method EXCEPT:
You are the project manager for a large children's toys manufacturer. You've been asked to manufacture the latest craze in "Dancing Widgets" for the upcoming Christmas season. You've been informed that the company needs at least one month lead time to distribute the Widgets in order to have the Widgets on retailers shelves for the Christmas season. You've been asked to breakdown the costs associated with production. Which of the following can be categorized as variable costs associated with the production?
You are using the three-point estimating technique to estimate the duration of a schedule activity. You are given the following data: [Pessimistic=100days] | [optimistic=40days] | [most likely=65 days] Which of the following statements are true?
You are in the process of developing an approximation of the costs of resources needed to complete each schedule activity. Which of the following is the LEAST helpful input?
You are in process of analyzing the effects of identified risks. Which of the following is the LEAST helpful input?
You are the project manager at an auto manufacturer. Due to the recent rise in the cost of petroleum, the market demand for hybrid cars with high fuel efficiency ahs increased. Your company has identified the multi-billion dollar market opportunity for highly fuel efficient vehicles. However, your organization does not have enough resources and expertise to exploit this opportunity. Hence, your organization has decided to identify the qualified candidates. Which of the following best describes the type of strategy you are using to deal with this market opportunity?
Which of the following statements are FALSE regarding rolling wave planning?
Which of the following risks should be classified as a force majeure risks?
Which of the following processes involves developing necessary procedures to mitigate threats to the project from the project risks?
All of the following statements are true regarding Simulation and Monte Carlo analysis EXCEPT:
Earned value analysis is a performance reporting tool/ technique. Which of the following best describes earned value (EV)?
You are the Chief Technology Officer of a major stock exchange. You are in charge of a project to reengineer the organization's back office accounting, billing, and administrative systems. Your project team has completed all the technical work required for the project and just scope verification. All of the following are actions you should perform next EXCEPT:
Which of the following statements are true regarding project endings?
All of the following are inputs to the Close Project process EXCEPT:
A SPI < 1 indicates which of the following?
Contract documentation is an input to the Contract Closure Process. It includes all of the following EXCPT:
All of the following statements are true EXCEPT:
Procurements audits are a tool/ technique of which of the following processes?
Performing the administrative closure process includes all of the following EXCEPT:
According to the PMI, which of the following best describes "phase exists"?
You are the project manager at a large accounting firm in the United States. Throughout the year your firm provides both consulting services and accounting/ auditing services to XYZ Widgets, Inc, a publicly traded company listed on the New York Stock Exchange. Currently, your project involves auditing the financial statements of XYZ Widgets Inc, in preparation for the annual shareholders/ investors meeting. While your team is in the midst of project execution, you are informed that your project is due to new SEC regulations. Specifically, a new SEC regulation prohibits accounting firms from providing both consulting services and auditing services to a client, due to potential conflicts of interest that could arise from such business relationships. Hence your project is cancelled and your project team consisting of accountants and auditors are taken off your project and reassigned to another project. Which of the following type of project ending is this considered?
Which of the following statements are true?
Which of the following are NOT considered formal types of project ending?
You are in process of completing and settling each contract application to the project or project phase. Which of the following are NOT outputs of this process?
All of the following are objectives of a buyer-conducted performance review EXCEPT:
Your project terminated early due to budget cuts. You' like to document the current level and completion of your project, even though your project terminated prematurely. In which of the following processes would you document the level of work completed for your project?
You are the project manager at a large construction company. Your company is under a times and materials contract to build a new shopping center. The estimated cost of project is $5,000,000. The project sponsor has approved this amount. However, you earned value calculations indicate that the project will be completed on time and under budget by 5,000,000. Based on this calculation your personal profit will decrease by $10,000. Given the estimated decrease in personal profit, what action should you take?
You work as project manager at a beauty products company. One of the primary product lines is hair-coloring/dye products. Your company's primary market is currently in the United States. However, your company is attempting to expand its distribution channels to Europe, specifically within the countries within the European Union. Your company has partnered up with several resellers within Europe to begin distribution of the cosmetic products into various retail channels. One of your partners has just informed you that one of the restrictions imposed by the European Union is that hair-care products must NOT contain any carcinogenic products. However, your dye contains trace amounts of carcinogens. By U.S. standards, the trace amount of carcinogens is considered to be safe. What is the appropriate response to this situation?
You are currently working on a web development project to develop a new user-interface for a legacy mainframe banking application. You are under a Times and Material contract to develop a wed based interface for this application. You have finished the work 20 hours earlier than expected. This means that the profit of your company will decrease. What should you do?
You are a contract manager within an information technology department of a large retailer. You are responsible fro developing a new ecommerce web-site for the retailer. You are in process of selecting the vendor who will provide the hardware, including computer servers and networking equipment. As a project manager, you are in the Select Sellers process, and have three different vendors on your qualified sellers list who have responded to your company's RFP. One of the vendors remaining on the qualified sellers list is NetComp Inc. you are an investor of this company. In fact, you own 2% of total outstanding shares of this company. In order to prevent any appearance of impropriety, what should you do?
Your friend Robert has recently achieved his PMP certification. Prior, to receiving his PMP, he had worked as a project manager, for various I.T projects over the past 4 years. Robert is familiar with various techniques fir I.T quality control and assurance. However, Robert is currently advertising himself as an expert in quality control for the manufacturing industry. But you know that the quality issues and techniques differ greatly between the I.T. industry and the manufacturing industry. In fact, you know that Robert has never even used control charts or cause-and-effect diagramming techniques. You feel that Robert is falsely advertising his credentials and expertise. How should you respond?
Micheal is a self employed PMP certified project manager who is currently working as a constructor at a company specializing in developing medical equipment. The company has a policy that explicitly states that smoking is not allowed during working hours. However, since Micheal is self-employed and not considered a regular company employee he decides to smoke during lunch hour. Which of the following statements are true?
Please select which of the following statements is TRUE regarding the initiating process group?
Which of the following is NOT included in the project scope statement?
Which of the following statement regarding competitive methods, scoring methods, and cash flow analysis?
Which of the following is not true regarding project charter?
Which of the following statements regarding project charter is false?
You are the project manager for the information technology division of the large financial brokerage in the United States. Due to new regulatory requirements en acted by srbanes-oxely, you have been assigned to audit all I.T. systems to ensure compliances. You need to ensure all the data in database is encrypted to ensure confidentially. You need to ensure that all the users are properly authenticated. You also need to verify the authorization to confidential financial information follows the least-privilege principle. This project came about as a result of which of the following is need?
Your work as a project manager at the computer chip manufacturer, developing*86 micro-processors. As predicted by moore's law each year your companies introduces new models of micro-processors which are more faster and powerful then their predecessors. Microprocessors that are obsolete or do not sell are quickly retired from production. The lifecycle for the micro-processors begins in R&D, extends to manufacturing, and finally ends with phase out. This cycle is often referred to as:
Dennis works 4 an international manufacturer of costumer electronics. He has been recently assigned to supervise and manage the manufacturing of a new model of flat screen television. His supervisor congratulates him on the expanded responsibilities and informs dennis that his new assignment will be indefinitely manage the manufacturing of this new product line. What of the following describes dennis's new assignment?
Which of the following best describes the following organizational structure?
You are the project manager at the Historie Shoppe, a rapidly growing retail book store selling hard-to-find books and periodicals. Currently your company is planning on opening additional stores throughout the United States. Your primary market includes densely populated, major metropolitan cities. Your company is deciding among New York and Los Angles. Based on the following data which project should be recommended using the discounted cash flow technique? Projected New York-Make $100,000 in 2 years Projected Los Angles-Make $110,000 in 3 years Assume that the cost of capital is 12%
You are the project manager for an information technology division of a large financial services firm in the United States. Your company offers a web based trading platform that provides options and futures trading for U.S commodities markets. Due to the rise in popularity of futures and options trading, your company has grown rapidly. To keep up with the demands you have been assigned with the responsibility of upgrading company's network and computing infrastructure. You planned to purchase a new high-end mainframe server. The new server will cost $250,000 and can be used for 10 years. After 2 years the resale value of mainframes will be 100,000. After 5 years the resale value of server will be 50,000. After 7 years the resale value of server will be 20,000. After 10 years, the server will be obsolete. What is the annual depreciation expense for this server if you use straight-line depreciation?
You have been recently hired to be a project manager at a bio-tech company to develop anew drug to treat pancreatic cancer. The project requires significant coordination across multiple departments from R&D to manufacturing. You've attempt to gain the cooperation of chief scientist within the R&D. however the Chief scientist is focused on completing her to-today tasks, and you do not have any control over her work assignment. What is the best way to describe her current organizational structure?
According to PMI, application areas are categories of projects that have common elements in the majority of projects, but are NOT necessarily required or applicable to all projects. Applications areas are not usually defined in terms of:
You are the project manager at Happy Coffee Cafe, a rapidly growing franchise selling premium blended coffee. Currently, your company is planning on opening additional stores throughout Europe. Your company is evaluating different areas for expansion, including France, Germany, and England. You intend to use NPV (net present value) analysis to evaluate which area provides the best opportunity for expansion. Which of the following statements are true regarding NPV calculations?
You are the chief technology officer of a major stock exchange in United States. You have just been provided a preliminary project scope statement from your project sponsor with regards to reengineering the organization's back office accounting, billing and administrative system. Which of the following the BEST NEXT plan of action?
The project charter either directly or by reference to other documents, should address all of the following EXCEPT:
Which of the following are NOT inputs to the Develop Project Charter process?
Which of the following is NOT a tool/ technique of the Develop preliminary Project Scope Statement process?
You are a project manager in a matrix organization. All of the following are disadvantages of this type of organization EXCEPT:
You are an information security project manager responsible for securing your cooperate network. Due to new regulations mandated by the Sarbanes-Oxley act your company's upper management has tasked you with securing the company's network infrastructure. You have just completed the Develop Preliminary Project Scope Statement process. However, upon review you have determined that the resulting Preliminary Project Scope Statement is ambiguous and poorly written. A poorly written Preliminary Project Scope Statement will directly impact all of the following subsequent processes EXCEPT:
Which of the following is formalized document that authorizes the project and should be prepared by someone who is external to project, and should not be directly prepared by the project manager?
You are the project manager fro the large children's toy manufacturer. You have been asked to manufacture the latest craze in "Dancing Widgets" for upcoming Christmas season. You've been informed that the company needs at least one month lead time in order to have Widgets on retailer's shelves for Christmas season. Hence, based on the current sales forecast you've been asked to deliver 100,000 units by November 1st at the least. However four months into the project you've noticed that the project has become 6 weeks BEHIND schedule. Since missing the deadline in unacceptable you've hired twenty additional contingent workers to get the project on track. This is an example of which type of following?
You are the project manager at Day-Old donuts, a rapidly growing franchise selling premium donuts at discount. Currently your company is planning on opening additional store throughout United States. Your primary market includes densely-populated, metropolitan cities. Your company is evaluating different companies fro evaluation including New York, San Francisco, and Los Angles. Based on the following data which project is recommended? Project New YorkInitial cost of $250,000 First year cash flow$ 50,000. $25,000 cash flow per quarter after Project Los AnglesInitial cost of $200,000 First year cash flow$ 50,000. $12,500 cash flow per quarter after Project San FranciscoPay back period of 24 months
Project mangers often refer to a project's triple constraints as a framework for evaluating completing demands. Please select which of the following describes the triple constraints?
Which of the following is not included in project scope statement?
Please select the correct order for the five project management process groups?
Which of the following establishes minimum requirements of performance for one or more evaluation criteria when selecting a prospective seller?
Which of the following Project Human Resource Management process is within the Executing process group?
Which of the following statements are FALSE regarding proposal Evaluation Techniques?
You are in the process of directing the performance of planned project activities and managing the various technical and organizational interfaces that exist within your project. All of the following are outputs of this process EXCEPT:
Which of the following best describes Maslow's theory of motivation?
You are the project manager working on constructing a suspension bridge for the city of San Francisco. You've just conducted an earned value analysis and determined that the CPI index is 1.20 and SPI index is 1.30. Specifically, your project is coming in ahead of schedule and under budget. However, one of your structural engineers informs that he is afraid that the welding does NOT meet quality standards. Unfortunately, sub-par quality in the welds could reduce the stability of the bridge, especially is the earthquake happens. Hence, you are working with the quality assurance department to verify that whether the project will satisfy the necessary quality standards. All of the following are required in order to start this process EXCEPT:
Which of the following statements are TRUE regarding precision versus accuracy?
All of the following are tools/ techniques of Perform Quality Assurance EXCEPT:
Hertzberg proposed that the satisfaction and dis-satisfaction at work resulted from two different factors "Hygiene" and "Motivation" factors. Please select which of the following are NOT considered motivation factors?
Which of the following are NOT benefits of meeting quality requirements?
You are the project manger at a biotech company, where you are leading a cross-functional team to develop a treatment for diabetes. The organization has a weak matrix structure, where all of your project team members report to different functional managers and none of the team member report to you directly. Your project has extremely high visibility in the company, and there is a lot of pressure on you to deliver on time and within budget. However, you are concerned whether you will have the necessary authority and power to complete the project deliverables. Which of the following types of powers will be MOST effective in your situation?
Which of the following statements are true regarding the communication process?
You are currently the project manager at a consulting company specializing in developing financial software models. Your company has been awarded a fixed fee contract to develop a sophisticated portfolio risk analysis software application for a multi-billion dollar hedge fund. During project execution, one of your team members delivers one of the completed risk analysis module to your client. The model uses the capital asset pricing model and Monte Carlo simulations to determine the best risk-adjusted returns for the portfolio. Unfortunately, the buyer refuses the deliverable, stating that the model did not meet he technical requirements as specified in the contract you have reviewed the specs, and agree with the buyer's assessment. Which of the following is the best action to take?
You have just awarded a contract to a outside vendor and developed the corresponding contract management plan. Which process did you just complete?
You are the project manager at a large automaker in Japan. Your project involves designing the next generation four wheel drive Sports Utility vehicle for the Asian market. Your project team is attempting to determine the right combination of suspension, tires and chassis that will ensure the stability of SUV at high speeds. Currently, you would like to measure the association between two vehicles: tire size and overall stability. Which of the following diagrams can you use?
All of the following are inputs to the Direct and /manage Execution process EXCEPT:
The project management execution processes include all of the following EXCEPT:
Which of the following describes the assumptions made by the theory Y style of management?
Which of the following statements are false regarding RACI charts?
You are the project manager for an international contract manufacturing firm with manufacturing plants and offices in India, China and Thailand. Your company designs and manufactures various consumer electronics, such as flat-screen television, laptops, and monitors etc. Your company is in the process of bidding on a project to manufacture the next generation the 128-bit video game console for X-Cube station. As a potential bidding for this project, you worked on the RFP response and submitting the proposal. The X-Cube Station selection committee received the RFP responses from all the vendors, and applied a weighted system in order to make a selection. Which of the following processes just took place?
Which of the following are outputs of the Develop Project team process?
Which of the following statements re true regarding Bidder Conferences, and Develop Qualified Sellers List?
Project staff assignments are an output of which process?
All of the following statements are true regarding proposals EXCEPT:
You are the project manager for a manufacturer of children's toys. Your project team is in process of designing a new children toy for next year's Christmas season. Your team meets and learns about the opportunity, agrees on goals and resources necessary to tackle the task. Although your team is highly motivated, they are relatively uninformed of the issues and objectives of the project. Which of the following stages of Develop Project Team best describes your team?
You are the project manager for a new software development project. You are in process of assigning resources to your project using a work authorization system. Which of the following statements are FALSE?
Which of the following process is involved in making needed information available to project stakeholders in a timely manner?
Which of the following statements re true regarding Herzberg's Hygiene theory?
You are the project manager for a company that sells online music. The company is growing so well that the company has outgrown its I.T infrastructure. In fact, the company's current infrastructure is unable to handle the terabytes of music download each day. As a result, the company has decided to outsource its music download infrastructure to a third party content management vendor. The content management vendor will host the compressed music files across its geographically distributed web server farms, and handle all the logistics with music file downloads and data streaming. On your qualified sellers list, you have identified one potential vendor MusikCM. Your procurement department is conducting an independent estimate of costs of the proposals in order to compare the vendor prices. However, your procurement department has identified a large difference between the independent estimate and the proposed vendor cost. In which process is this taking place?
All of the following are true regarding change control system EXCEPT:
Which of the following are NOT outputs of the Information Distribution process?
All of the following statements re true regarding contract negotiation EXCEPT:
Which of the following statements regarding quality audits are FALSE:
All of the following are examples of virtual teams EXCEPT:
Which of the following statements are FALSE?
Which of the following processes is NOT part of Project Human Resources Management Knowledge Area?
All of the following are different dimensions of communication EXCEPT:
Variance analysis, trend analysis, and earned value techniques are:
You are in process of monitoring the various project processes and their performance. Which of the following is the LEAST appropriate tool/ technique to use in this process?
All of the following statements are true regarding issue logs EXCEPT:
Which of the following statements are true regarding random causes and special causes with respect to statistical Perform Quality Control?
Which of the following statements are false regarding project risk management?
Work performance information is an input to Cost Control process. It includes all of the following EXCEPT:
Which of the following statements are true regarding risk response audits?
All of the following statements are true regarding decomposition EXCEPT:
You are a project manager at a real estate company that develops and manages commercial, retail and residential properties in South America, Europe, and Asia. As a company continues to grow, the company's IT infrastructure is unable to meet business needs of organization. Hence you have been assigned to upgrade the company's IT infrastructure. Specifically, your team has been asked to implement a corporate general ledger system, improve accounting and real estate processes, develop a lease tracking system, and implement HR and payroll systems. Your project team has already completed all the initiating / project planning activities and received sign-off/ approvals on the project charter, project scope, and detailed work packages. Your project team is in the process of completing all the work packages. However, you have just received a change request to add additional reporting functionality to the lease tracking application. Fortunately you have already determined that this functionality has no side effects on the components of the "triple constraints". Which of the following is the BEST action to perform NEXT?
Integrate Change Control includes the following activities EXCEPT:
You are in process of reviewing all change requests and controlling changes to deliverables and organizational process assets. All of the following are outputs of this process EXCEPT:
You are project manager responsible for constructing a new sports arena for the upcoming Olympics. Construction begins on a project over a year ago. The stakeholders of the project want a status report on the performance of the project to date. You've obtained the following measurements: BAC=500, ETC=200, PV=500, AC=200, EV=300, CPI=1.5 You believe the type of variances that have occurred on the project to date are typical expect these variances to continue throughout the project. Based on the information above, what is the EAC for the project?
The Estimate At Completion (EAC) can be used to forecast the most likely total project cost based upon the current project performance. Which of the following formulas cannot be used to calculate the EAC?
You are the project manager at a large automaker in Japan. Your project involves designing the next generation 4-wheel drive Sport Utility vehicle for the Asian market. A new fuel efficient engine design is required as part of your project. Unfortunately, your project team did not have the necessary expertise to design and manufacture a new fuel-efficient engine. Hence, your company plans has decided to subcontract all the engine designs to an outside manufacturer. You are currently in the Contract Administration process. Which of the following statements is true regarding the Contract Administration process?
Which of the following statement are true regarding the CPI (cost performance index) measurements?
You are currently the project manager for a software development project, developing a next generation data-mining tool. Your team is developing a new software product that will help customers better manage large volumes of data, especially for data reporting purposes. The CEO tells you that the project must be completed within 18 months. In order to meat theses strict deadlines you are currently in the process of estimating the duration of project plan activities, devising the project schedule, and monitoring and controlling deviations from the schedule. Which of the following Project Management Knowledge Areas are you involved in?
Which of the following statements BEST describes a work authorization system?
You are in the process of tracking identified risks, monitoring residual risks, and executing the risk response plans. Which of the following tools/ techniques are you LEAST likely to use during this process?
All of the following statements are true regarding conflict management EXCEPT:
You are the project manager of a company that is building ATM software for a large bank and financial institutions. You have been told that the ATM software must meet very stringent quality standards. Including rigorous auditing of all transactions, ability to recover in case of software/ hardware errors, and fraud detection and analysis. In order to ensure that these quality standards are met, you've invested heavily in proper training of your project staff, instrumented numerous design review and rigorous performed quality planning. Which of the following best describes the cost associated with you project?
A Responsibility Assigned Matrix (RAM) can be used for all of the following EXCEPT:
Which of the following statements are true regarding Project Scope Management?
Configuration management activities included in the integrated change control process include all of the following EXCEPT:
You are in the process of controlling changes to project schedule. All of the following are tools/ techniques of this process EXCEPT:
One of your friends is a manager at telecommunications company. She is currently managing a project developing a VoIP (Voice over IP) gateway that addresses the challenges facing service providers deploying packer-based voice networks. The gateway offers a comprehensive approach to implementing high-density carrier-class voice over packet gateway applications. The project is going well, except for the large number of changes being made for the project requirements. The project is fairly complex, requiring coordination across several different functional departments, including marketing, manufacturing, engineering, and finance. To help manage the project, twenty project management processes, were selected for use during this project. In addition, the project manager is also a technical expert regarding VoIP applications and is adept at managing people and communications. Which of the following is the MOST likely reason why the project is expecting problems?
You are currently analyzing the schedule of a project. You have noticed that for certain critical-path activities in the project, the schedule completion date of activity versus the actual completion date of the activities differed significantly. Which of the following statements are true?
You are in the process of tracking team member performance, providing feedback, and coordinating changes to improve project performance. Which of the following tools/ techniques is LEAST helpful?
You are in process of controlling changes to the project scope. All of the following are outputs of this process EXCEPT:
You are in process of controlling changes to the project cost baseline. All of the following are outputs of this process EXCEPT:
You are in process of exterminating which set of project activities will take the longest to complete. Which of the following is the MOST appropriate tool to use?
You are a project manager responsible for constructing a new sports arena in preparation of the upcoming Olympics. Construction began on the project a year ago. The stakeholder of the project want a status report on the performance of the project to the date. Unfortunately, you are afraid of telling your stakeholders that your project is coming in over the budget and the cost change is required using the cost change control system. Which of the following tools were used to calculate the cost variance projection?
Ishikawa diagrams are used in which of the following processes?
You are the Chief Technology Officer of a major stock exchange. You are in the charge of the project to reengineer the organization's back office accounting, billing and administrative system. Your project team is in the process of implementing the technical work required for the project. However one of the stakeholders for your project is requesting variance changes to the project. Which of the following is the best approach to take the beginning of the project in order to manage the project?
Which of the following best describes the conflict resolution technique that involves problem solving and fact-finding missions in order to discuss a win-win resolution?
Which of the following statements regarding configuration management system is least true?
Which of he following best describes the risks that still remain after avoidance , transfer, or mitigation responses have been implemented?
With respect to earned value analysis, which of the following is the value of work actually completed?
Which of the following illustrate a chart with upper /lower limits on which value of some statistical measure for a series of samples are plotted using sample measure measurement, where the mean and standard deviation are determine from the sample selected?
Which of the following statement are false regarding issue logs?
Your company is making a strategy shift: form being focused on fulfilling customer requests for becoming the best cost dairy producer in industry. Its existing cost manufacturing cost system, however fails to capture the costs associated with handling special flavors, small production orders, and complex delivery and order processing options. Hence you've been assigned to supervise an existing project to develop a new time-drive, activity-based costing system that will capture the full complexity of the company's operations and gives managers new insights into the profitability orders, products, and customers. Senior management will use the information to enhance process efficiencies, negotiating new terms with customers, and attempt to win new business. You are taking over the project during the planning process group. Upon reviewing the project charter, you discover that eight individuals were requiring to sign-off the project charter in order to authorize the project. Which of the following should cause the MOST concern?
Product analysis uses which of the following techniques EXCEPT:
A poorly defined staffing management plan will LEAST impact:
You are the project manager responsible for constructing new 100-unit apartment in downtown Manhattan. As part of construction project, you are planning to outsource the electrical wiring of the building to an outside contracting firm. The contracting firm has requested a statement of work from you. Which of the following statements are FALSE regarding the contract SOW?
Activity cost estimates and its supporting details are output of which process?
Which of the following best describes the amount of time one can delay the start of a task without delaying the start of a successor task?
You've been hired as a project manager for a local community college. The community college wants you upgrade the hardware for each of its web servers, and install the necessary security patches for each webserver. You are ready to begin the activity duration estimation process. You are told that there are total 50 web-servers that need to be upgraded. From past experience, you know that it takes about two hours to upgrade the hardware and install patches on each web server. Therefore, you estimate that it will take approximately 100 hours to complete this project. Which duration estimation technique did u just see?
A risk management plan is a subset of the project management plan and describes how risk management should be performed. All of the following should be included in the risk management plan EXCEPT:
You are using the three-point estimating technique to estimate the duration of a schedule activity. Which of the following is the correct formula for calculating variance assuming a triangular distribution?
You are in the process of identifying and documenting the logical relationships among schedule activities. Which of the following are NOT inputs to this process?
You are in the process of estimating the number of work periods that will be needed to complete individual schedule activities. All of the following are tools techniques you can use EXCEPT:
Which of the following best describes a cost and schedule planning techniques where details are developed for the near term and general allocations are made for work far in the future. Detail is developed for work far in the future as information becomes available to do so.
You are in the process of defining activities that need to be performed to develop the necessary project deliverables. Which of the following are NOT outputs that you will produce during this process?
All of the following are types of strategies that one can use to deal with risks with upside opportunity EXCEPT:
You are in the process of estimating the number of work periods that will be needed to complete individual schedule activities. All of the following are valuable inputs to this process EXCEPT:
You are in the process of establishing a total cost baseline for measuring project performance. Which of the following is the LEAST helpful tool / technique?
In which of the project processes should one determine whether to obtain products and services from outside the organization?
Expert judgment is a tool/ technique in all of the following EXCEPT:
You have been recently been assigned to provide an accurate project schedule for constructing a new 50-story casino, in Las Vegas, Nevada. You are evaluating the network diagram for the construction project, and are using the forward pass calculations to construct the schedule. You are trying to calculate the earliest start time for laying the foundation of the building. The expected duration for this task is 150 days. The task must be completed within 300 days, while the expected completion is within 220 days. The latest finish time is 200 days. Based on this information, what is the earliest start time of this task?
You are the project manager responsible for renovating a 70-year old office building. You intend to hire an outside construction firm to seismic retrofit the building in order to make that the building can with stand large earthquakes. You are in the process of selecting a contract type best suited for this project. You would like to select a contract type that transfers the risks onto the seller for any cost risk and nonperformance issues. Which contract type should you choose?
All of the statements regarding decision tree analysis is true EXCEPT:
Qualitative risk analysis requires accurate data as its input. Risk Data Quality Assessment is a technique to evaluate the degree to which the data regarding risks would be useful. What is the best course of action if the Risk Data Quality Assessment for most of the identified risks are low?
Which of the following are not tools/ techniques that can be used to create the WBS?
Which of the following statements are true regarding Management Reserves?
You are currently in the process of prioritizing risks by their impact or probability of occurrence. Which of following tools/ techniques are LEAST useful?
All of the following statements regarding Control Accounts are true EXCEPT:
Keeping up with the growth was becoming a problem for a privately owned Chinese financial services company. Although it easily lured business from state-owned competitors, low skill levels and weak accounting systems threaten the company's cash flow. Moreover, poorly invested assets were delivering inadequate returns. Hence, you have been assigned over an existing project to upgrade the IT system to allow for an expansion. Specifically, the IT upgrade will enable the company to serve more competitors, expand the product line, gain market share, and win more licenses. Your project team has already created the WBS, developed estimates for the work packages, and created the project network diagram. Which of the following should you perform NEXT?
You are in the process of establishing a total cost baseline for measuring project performance. All of the following are outputs of this process EXCEPT:
You are the project manager for a construction company. Your firm has been contracted to complete the construction of a 10-story office building. This project will use three point estimates to calculate the estimates for activity duration. You have the following estimates for task A (creating the foundation). Assuming the triangular distribution what is the average duration estimate based on the following three point estimates? Pessimistic= 100 days Optimistic= 40 days Most likely=65 days
Which of the following processes is involved with identifying which quality standards are relevant to the project and devising a plan on how to meet / satisfy these standards?
Which of the following statement are FALSE regarding the probability impact matrix technique?
You are the project manger at a software company developing the next-gen web application server. As software development can be very chaotic, your company has elected to follow the more rigorous approach to software development. Specifically, your company has chosen to adopt the Rational Unified Process (RUP) for your current software project. The RUP methodology is highly iterative and produces numerous deliverables include UML diagrams, architecture diagrams, prototypes, and test-cases. You have just produce the project schedule network diagram and just updated the project activity list. Which process have you just finished?
You are in the process of identifying and documenting the project roles and responsibilities and create staffing management plan. All of the following are tools/ techniques you can use EXCEPT:
You are in the process of painting your house. Since you do not want to start painting your house prior to rain storm, you check the weather report to make sure that weather is permitting. Which type of dependency best describes the relationship between the weather and your project?
The risk register is initiated in the Risk Identification process and further updated in the Qualitative Risk analysis and Quantitative Risk analysis processes. Which of the following are NOT risk register updates as part of the Quantitative Risk Analysis process?
You are the project manager at Construction Company, assigned to build 30-storey apartment building. In order to being constructing the frame of the building, the foundation of the building must be built. Which of the following relationship types best describes this dependency between framing and foundation?
You are the project manager at a utility company. Due to the recent rise in the cost of petroleum, your organization is exploring cheaper, alternative forms of energy. You have just completed the project Scope Planning process and created the Scope management plan. However, upon review, you have determined that the resulting project scope management plan is ambiguous and poorly written. A poorly written project scope management plan will directly impact all of the following EXCEPT:
All of the following are considered schedule network analysis techniques EXCEPT:
Which of the following processes involves determining what resource and what quantities of each should be used to perform project activities?
Which of the following documents generated by the create WBS process includes a code of account identifier, a statement of work, and a list of schedule milestones for each WBS component?
You are the project manager assigned to construct a new 10-story office building. You are trying to estimate the costs for this project. You start by assigning the costs associated with each of the project activity. Then you sum up all the individual costs into a final cost estimate. Which type of cost estimation technique did you use?
The risk register describes all the identified risks. Which of the following is NOT included as part of the risk register?
You are in the process of estimating the type and quantity of resources needed to complete individual schedule activities. All of the following tools/ techniques you can use in this process EXCEPT:
Which of the following statements regarding WBS are true?
Which of the following is the MOST valuable result of creating the work breakdown structure?
With respect to risk management, which of the following statements are FALSE regarding Decision Tree Analysis?
You are the project manager at an utility company. Due to the recent rise in the cost of petroleum, your organization is exploring cheaper, alternates of energy. Your team has just produced the work break down structure. However, upon review, you discover that the WBS lacks the necessary details and requires more decomposition. A poorly defined WBS will directly impact all of the following EXCEPT:
All of the following statements are TRUE regarding modeling and simulation EXCEPT:
You are in the process of developing an approximation of the costs of the resources needed to complete each schedule activity. All of the following are tools/ techniques you can use in this process EXCEPT:
You are the project manager for an information technology division of a large financial services firm in the United States. Your company offers a web based trading platform that provides options and futures trading for U.S commodities markets. Due to the rise in popularity of futures and options trading, your company has grown rapidly. To keep up with the demands you have been assigned with the responsibility of upgrading company's network and computing infrastructure. You have already inspected the existing infrastructure and are in the process of defining detailed project scope statement for your project. All of following are tools/ techniques you can use EXCEPT:
You are the project manager for an information technology division of a large financial services firm in the United States. Your company offers a web based trading platform that provides options and futures trading for U.S commodities markets. Due to the rise in popularity of futures and options trading, your company has grown rapidly. To keep up with the demands you have been assigned with the responsibility of upgrading company's network and computing infrastructure. You have given the project charter progressively elaborated the requirements, and have just completed the Scope Definition and Create WBS processes. However while you are in the activity duration process you realized that certain deliverables are missing from the scope definition and create WBS processes. What is your next plan of action?
You have been recently assigned to provide an accurate project schedule for constructing a new 50-story casino in Las Vegas, Nevada. You are evaluating the network diagram for the construction project, and are in the process of identifying the critical path of the project. Based on the following diagram, which path is the critical path?
You are the project manager responsible for developing a new hybrid engine for a major auto manufacturer. You are in the process of developing the project schedule and would like to access the feasibility of your project schedule under various different conditions. Which of the following scheduling techniques is the LEAST appropriate?
Decomposition of project work involves all of the following EXCEPT:
All of the following are environmental factors that should be considered during Human Resource Planning EXCEPT:
All of the statements are FALSE regarding Resource Calendars?
Which of the following statements are true regarding the Risk Breakdown Structure?
Which of the following statements are FALSE regarding sensitivity analysis?
Risk diagramming techniques include all of the following EXCEPT:
Risk to the project can be categorized by all of the following EXCEPT:
You are the project manager responsible for developing a new hybrid engine for a major auto manufacturer. You are in the process of developing the project schedule and would like to identify the project risks and associated risk response plans. Where would you be able to retrieve this information?
All of the following can be used to estimate the contingency reserves during Activity Duration Estimation EXCEPT:
The project scope management plan is an output of which of the following process?
You have been recently assigned to provide an accurate project schedule for a large construction company. You are evaluating the network diagram for the construction project. Your lead engineer has given you the following estimates for several critical path activity: 30 days (optimistic), 80 days (pessimistic), and 40 days (most likely). Which of the following statements are true, assuming the beta distribution?
You are in the process of estimating the type and quantity of resources needed to complete individual schedule activities. All of the following are tools/ techniques you can use in this process EXCEPT:
Which of the following statements are true regarding estimation techniques?
Which of the following diagramming methods can only use finish-tostart relationships and may use dummy activities to express logical relationship between activities?
Which of the following are outputs of the Risk Management Planning process?
You are using three point estimating technique to estimate the estimate of a scheduled activity. Which of the following statement are true given the following data: Pessimistic= 100 days Optimistic= 40 days Most likely= 65 days Average =66.6 days
You are the project manager at a company developing an online music store. You are in the process of calculating the cost budget for this project using a combination of parametric estimation and bottom-up estimation. Which of the following statements are FALSE:
Which of the activities have negative slack, given the table below?
Which of the following is LEAST likely to improve the accuracy of cost estimates produced through parametric cost estimating technique?
You are in the process project a project schedule for repainted your house, you first need to scrap off the existing paint, and then add a layer of primer. The primer provides the paint a better bonding surface so it sticks to the base material much better. Without priming, drywall surfaces will soak up more finish paint in some areas than in others, producing a splotchy effect. You decided to speed up the process by starting priming before all the scraping is finished. However once the primer is applied you must wait until the primer dries before adding on the actual paint. You estimate that it will take 8 hours for the primary to dry. To correctly sequence these activities, which of the following should you do?
You are the project manager at a utility company. Due to the recent rise in the cost of petroleum, your organization is exploring cheaper, alternative forms of energy. You have just completed the project scope changes, requested changes, and updates to the project scope management plan. Which of the following process did you just complete?
Which of the following best describes project funds that are held in reserve to account for and offset known risks, such as project scope risks, schedule risks, cost or quality risks?
You are in the process of identifying and documenting project risks. Which of the following statements are true?
Which of the following is the total amount of time that a scheduled activity may be delayed from its early start date without delaying the project finish date?
Which of the following process is involved in developing an approximation of the costs of the resources needed to complete project activities?
Which of the following processes involves analyzing activity sequences, activity duration, and resource requirements, to develop the project schedule?
You are involved in monitoring specific project results to determine whether they comply with relevant quality standards. You are suing the control chart to illustrate how the process is behaving over time. You have constructed your control chart and that all data points are within upper and lower control limits of chart. In addition, seven consecutive data points re observed, to be on one side of the mean. Which of the following is your BEST plan of action?
You are in the process of obtaining the necessary human resource to complete the project. Which of the following are not the outputs of this process?
Which of the following describes an input to the direct and manage project execution process that consist of documented, authorized changes to expand or contract the project scope?
Which of the following statements are true regarding the project human resource management process?
Which of the following documents describes the details of the procurement items in order to allow prospective seller to determine whether they are capable of providing the products or services?
With respect to the cost of quality which of the following individuals are responsible for developing the "fitness for use" approach?
A project manager should exhibit two types of leaderships. These are transactional and transformational. The leader should guide the members by identifying their roles and responsibilities for the project. In addition he should inspire the team members to successfully complete the project tasks. If the project manager follows the Mc"Gragor theories of leadership which of the following statements are true?
Which of the following tools are used to implementation of approved change request, corrective actions, and defect repairs?
Project report, project record, and project presentation are outputs of which of the following process?
Which of the following conflict resolution techniques describes a situation where each of the parties involved in the conflict give up something in order to reach a solution?
You are in the process of reviewing offers and choosing among potential sellers. All of the following are tools you can use EXCEPT:
You have just completed the project planning process group and are ready to begin the project executing process group. You will need no perform all the following executing process except
You are the project manager for the international contract manufacturing firm with manufacturing the plants and offices in India, China and Thailand. Your company design and manufacture various consumer electronics such as flat screen, television, laptop computers, monitors, e.t.c. Your company is in the process of bidding on a project to manufacture the next generation 128-bit video game console for x-cube station. As a potential bidder for this project your company must register so that it is on the qualified seller list. Which of the following statements are true?
Which of the following statements are true regarding quality planning and perform quality assurance?
You are in the process of reviewing offers and choosing among potential sellers. All the following are the outputs of process except:
Which of the following statement are false regarding Delphi's technique:
You are in the process of directing the performance of the planed project activities and managing the various technical and organizational interfaces that exist within your project. All the following are actions that you should perform in this stage except:
You are a project manager at a biotech company where you are responsible for developing treatment for diabetes. You are in functional organization, where you have little formal authority within the organization. Which of the following describes the type of power you have in organization?
Which of the following are least found to as a part of project?
Which of the following is false regarding recognition and rewards?
You are the project manager for the manufacturer of children's toys. Your project team is in the process of designing a new toy for children for next Christmas season. Your 10 members are working together for past six months. All 10 are in constant communication with each other. How many lines of communications are their in your project team?
Which of the following is buyer-prepared formal request sent to seller and is basis upon which seller prepares n bid?
Which of the following is not one of the five project management process group?
Top three cases on conflict on the project and project schedule, project priorities and:
Which of the following are not situations where pre assignment of project team members are known in advance?
Weighting systems, screening systems, and independent estimates are tools of which process?
Which of the following project communication management process is within the executing process group?
Implemented change request, implemented corrective actions and implemented preventive actions are inputs to which process?
Which of the following tools can be used to help to analyze how quality problems occur, and depict that how the various components of system interrelate?
During project executing, a previously unidentified risk has just occurred. This risk will negatively effect the outcome of the project. Which of the following is best to perform next?
A manager works very closely with his subordinates to create an effective working environment. Once a new person is hired, he works with the employee to set realistic goals for the short term and long term. In addition he continuously works with employee to discuss career path and career ambitions. He is constantly coaching, counseling and meeting. Once his employees reach the goal, he reward them with merit, increases/bonus , offer expanded job responsibilities, with new challenges, which of the following motivational theories is least utilized in his management approach to motivating his employees?
All the following statements are true regarding communication management plan except:
You are a project manager for a company that sells online music. The company is going so well that company has outgrown its I.T infrastructure. In fact the company's current infrastructure is unable to handle the terabytes of music downloads each day. As a result company decided to give music download to 3rd party content. On your qualified seller list you have identified one potential vendor, music CM. your procure department has identified a large difference between the independent estimate and proposed vendor cost. Which of the following statements are true?
Which of the following are not the direct results of managing the project team?
Which of the following best describes the project human resource management knowledge Area?
Which of the following statements are false regarding reward recognition systems?
Which of the following statements are not true regarding corrective actions?
You are the project manager for the manufacturer of children's toys. Your project team is in the process of designing a new toy for children for next Christmas season. Your project team has worked together for the last six months and has become a self-directed team with little, If any management supervision required. Which of the following stages of develop project team best describes your team?
which of the following best describes the request seller responses process?
All of the following statements regarding bidder conferences are true EXCEPT:
You are a project manager at a biotech company, where you are leading a cross functional team to develop a treatment for diabetes. The organization has a weak matrix structure, where al of your team members report to different functional managers and none of the team member report to you directly. You have just completed the latest round of performance reviews and identified the CPI is 1.15, SPI is1.05, and few minor adjustments are needed. In order to improve the project performance and team motivation you have decided to collaborate them into brand new facility. The facility has the state of art gym and a 24 hour cafeteria. Team is quite excited about the move. Which of the following best describes the actions?
You are in the contract Closure process and are reviewing the contract process to identify the lessons learned. Which of the following best describes the tool/technique you are using?
Contract documentation is an input to the Contract Closure process. It includes all of the following EXCEPT:
Consider the project Integration Management knowledge area. Which of the process are not included?
During what phase of project lifecycle is the level of risk and uncertainty is the lowest?
Which of the following best describes the tool/ technique used to identify lessons learned during the procurement process, including the identification and examination of any problems and areas for improvement?
Product verification is usually performed in closing process. Which of the following statement are true?
You are the project manager at a large accounting firm in the United States. Throughout the year your firm provides both consulting services and accounting/ auditing services to XYZ Widgets, Inc, a publicly traded company listed on the New York Stock Exchange. Currently, your project involves auditing the financial statements of XYZ Widgets Inc, in preparation for the annual shareholders/ investors meeting. While your team is in the midst of project execution, you are informed that your project is due to new SEC regulations. Specifically, a new SEC regulation prohibits accounting firms from providing both consulting services and auditing services to a client, due to potential conflicts of interest that could arise from such business relationships. Hence your project is cancelled and your project team consisting of accountants and auditors are taken off your project and reassigned to another project. Which of the following statements are true?
All of the following are outputs the closure project process EXCEPT:
Which of the following establishes the procedures to transfer the project product or services to production and / or operations?
Which of the following statements are true regarding the procurement audit tool/ technique?
Which of the following formulas is used to calculate the CPI (cost performance index)?
Historical records from previous project are generally used for all of the following EXCEPT:
Which of the following statements are false regarding the close project process?
Which process group includes processes used to formally terminate all activities of a project or a project phase?
Earned value analysis is a performance reporting tool/ technique used in manage stakeholder's process. Which of the following performance measurements is derived by the following formula: (EAC-AC)?
You are currently the project manager for a software development project, developing a next generation data-mining tool. Your team is developing a new software product that will help customers better manage large volumes of data, especially for data reporting purposes. Your team has just completed one of the project phasesdeveloping a simple prototype system. You would like to have prototype reviewed prior to deciding whether to move to the next phase of the project. According to the PMI, these types of reviews are NOT called:
One of your friends is a manager at telecommunications company. She is currently managing a project developing a VoIP (Voice over IP) gateway that addresses the challenges facing service providers deploying packer-based voice networks. The gateway offers a comprehensive approach to implementing high-density carrier-class voice over packet gateway applications. All the technical work has already been completed on the project, and the project is in the closing phase. Which of the following should be performed at this stage?
Which of the following statements are FALSE regarding Project closure documents?
Which of the following are NOT described in the PMI's Member Standards of Conduct?
You work at RFID-PM Inc, a publicly traded company that develops RFID technology. Radio Frequency Identification RFID is a method of remotely storing and retrieving data using devices called RFID tags/ transponders. An RFID tag is a small object, such as an adhesive sticker, that can be attached to or incorporated into a product Your friend, Nelson, has asked you for the financial information regarding your company. So you decide to forward him the SEC (Securities and Exchange Commission) 10K filing/ financial statements from the SEC web-site. Hove you provided insider information regarding your company?
You are a project manager at a construction company who is working in a foreign country to perform reconstruction work for the various infrastructure and utility services, including water, sewage, and electricity. During your initial visit to the country, you were presented a jewelry gift valued over $5,000. you were told that this is local custom to give such gifts to business partners during their visits. What should you do?
You are the project manager within and information technology department of a large retailer. You are responsible for updating the network infrastructure of the company. As a project manager, you are in the Select Sellers process, and have four different vendors on your qualified sellers list. One of the vendors on your list has invited you and your family to Hawaii for a "convention". The vendor assures that the convention is for legitimate business purposes and will be helpful in letting your company better evaluating their offerings. However, you are hesitant to accept the gift. To appraise your concerns, the vendor tells you that they will be doing a demo of the systems and other members of your project team in the past have attended. What should you do?
Which of the following processes is considered the most effective process to ensure that cultural and ethical differences do not impede success of your multi-national project?
You are the project manager within an information technology department of a large retailer. In order to allow for better real-time tracking, inventory control, and supply chain management, your company is financing a project to install and deploy RFID tags on all items of merchandise. As a project manger, you've just completed the Select Sellers process, and selected a vendor to perform the RFID installation and deployment. After the contract is assigned with the vendor, the account manager from the vendor calls for thank you for selecting them. As a thank-you gift, they would like to give you and your project team tickets to a free dinner convention, where the vendor will be providing a demo if their latest RFID systems. How should you respond?
Which of the following statements are true regarding the project charter?
Which of the following statements are NOT true?
You are the project manager for an information technology division of a large health care provider in the United States. Due to the new regulatory requirements enacted by HIPAA to ensure the privacy of confidential medical records, you have been assigned to audit all I.T systems to ensure compliance. You need to ensure that all data stored in the data base is encrypted to ensure confidentiality. You need to ensure that all users are properly authenticated. You also need to verify that authorization to confidential information follows the least privilege principle The deadline to ensure compliance with HIPAA regulations is within 120 days. Failing to complete the project within 120 days will result in significant fines to your organization. You have been given a budget is fixed and cannot be increased. Which of the following statements are true?
You have been recently hired to be a project manager at a software company to develop the next generation anti-virus software program. The project requires significant coordination across multiple departments, from engineering to QA to manufacturing. You are concerned whether you'll have enough influence and authority to manage the project priorities across these various departments. What should you do in this situation?
Which of the following statements are true regarding the project statement of work?
One of your friends is a project manager at a computer security company. She is currently managing a project for the development of a NAC (network admissions control) appliance that uses the network infrastructure to enforce security policy compliance on all devices seeking to access network computing resources, thereby limiting damage from emerging security threats. Her project team has just completed the initial project budget and schedule and is ensure what to perform next. Which of following would you recommend as the NEXT BEST action to perform?
You are an information security project manager responsible for securing your corporate network. Due to new regulations mandated by the Sarbanes-Oxley act, your company's upper management has tasked you with securing the company's network infrastructure. You have just completed the develop preliminary project scope statement process. However upon review you've determined the resulting preliminary project scope statement is ambiguous and poorly written. A poorly written Preliminary Project Scope Statement will directly impact all of the following EXCEPT:
You are currently the project manager for a software development project, developing a next generation data-mining tool. Your team is developing a new software product that will help customers better manage large volumes of data, especially for data reporting purposes. Midway through the project your customers has asked you to add additional reporting functionality to the software, specifically to correlate sales data across multiple geographic regions based on time. The functionality was NOT part of the original project plan. This is an example of which of the following?
Which of the following describes the following organizational structure?
You are the project manger at a utility company. Due to the recent rise in the cost of petroleum, your organization is exploring cheaper, alternatives forms of energy. You are in the process of developing the project charter. All of the following are tools/ techniques that you can use to develop the project charter EXCEPT:
You are the project manager for a large children's toys manufacturer. You've been asked to manufacture the latest craze in "Dancing Widgets" for the upcoming Christmas season. You've been informed that the company needs at least one month lead time to distribute the Widgets in order to have the Widgets on retailers shelves for the Christmas season. Hence, based on the current sales forecast you have been asked to deliver 100,000 units by august 1st at the latest. Which document describes the business needs for this project, identifies key deliverables, and gives you authority to begin the project and start assigning resources?
You are the project manager at Happy Coffee Cafe, a rapidly growing franchise selling premium blended coffee. Currently, your company is planning on opening additional stores through the United states. Your target markets primarily include densely populated metropolitan areas. Your company is evaluating different areas for expansion, including New York, San Francisco, and Seattle. Based on your market analysis you have obtained the following information: New York-IRR (33%), payback period (1.5 years) San Francisco-IRR (45%), payback period (1.1 years) Seattle-IRR (36%), payback period (0.75 years) Based on this data which area is best for Happy Coffee Cafe?
Which of the following statements are true regarding straight line depreciation?
Which of the following is NOT a valid reason to authorize a project?
Which of the following statements are TRUE regarding the difference between a project expeditor and project coordinator roles?
You have been assigned to a project to build the largest U.S. natural gas pipeline project in more than 20 years. The proposed 1,350-mile, 42-inch diameter pipeline will provide valuable infrastructure allowing producers in the Rocky Mountain region to deliver their natural gas to attractive markets in the Midwest and northeastern parts of the U.S. You are in the project planning process where you are involved in identifying the specific schedule activities that need to be performed to produce the various project deliverables. During this process one of your team members identifying an activity that need to be accomplished. However, another team member, based on this interpretation of the project scope statement, believes that the activity is outside the scope of project. Which of the following is the BEST action to take?
You are the project manager for an information technology division of a large financial services firm in the United States. Your company offers a web based trading platform that provides options and futures trading for U.S commodities markets. Due to the rise in popularity of futures and options trading, your company has grown rapidly. In fact, due to rapid growth, the company's I.T. infrastructure is unable to meet the growing demands. To keep up with the demands you have been assigned the responsibility of upgrading the company's network and company's infrastructure. You have been asked to calculate the payback period for the project that is to be completed in the next 24 months.
You are the project manger at XYZ Software Corp, a U.S software company developing enterprise Human Resources Applications. You've been asked to reduce the company's engineering costs by developing an off-shore software development centre. Recently a senior VP of engineering has expressed concerns over the project plan. His concern is that if the project is implemented as planned, he'll have to layoff a substantial portion number of US based software engineers. The organizational impact of the layoffs is substantial and was not taken into consideration during the project planning?
Which of the following statements about fast-tracking is TRUE?
Which of the following best describes cost incurred in the past whose total will not be affected by any decisions made now or in the future?
Which of the following best describes fast-tracking?
One of your friend is a project manager at a natural gas energy company. He is managing a project for the construction and operation of pipeline facilities at U.S. points of entry for the import or export of natural gas. The company had performed a similar project a couple years ago. This is the critical project for the company and he is under a tremendous pressure to deliver the project. Unfortunately, he is new to the company and the project is growing in size every day. He is starting to feel overwhelmed by the project. What is his BEST course of action?
Which of the following regarding project charter is FALSE?
Which of the following statements are TRUE regarding the scope verification process?
Which of the following are tool/ technique of Perform Quality Control that involves measuring or testing results to determine whether they confirm to the requirements and quality standards?
You are the Chief Technology officer of a major Stock Exchange. You are in charge of a project to reengineer the organization's bank office accounting, billing and administrative systems. Your project team is in the process of implementing the technical work required for the project. However, one of the stakeholders for your project is requesting minor changes to the project deliverables. You call a meeting with your project team to determine how to best proceed with the change. This is an example of which of the following?
You are in the process of controlling changes to a project baseline. Which of the following is the LEAST helpful input?
You have been assigned to a project to construct a 18-hole golf course, featuring 7,500 yard, par-72 course that has a magnificent tropical setting. You've calculated the estimated project completion date. However the estimated completion date is 5 months after the desired completion date. After analyzing the project network diagram, you've determined that many of the activities have discretionary dependencies. To decrease the project duration you've requested additional resources, but were told that NO additional resources are available for your project. Assuming that the project has low risks, which of the following is the BEST plan of action?
You are in the process of monitoring the various project processes and their performance. Which of the following is the LEAST appropriate output of this process?
Which of the following best describes secondary risks?
Which of the following tools/techniques can be used to help ensure that project work tasks will NOT be duplicated by multiple team members?
You are in the process of monitoring the various project processes and their performance. Which of the following are you LEAST concerned with during this process?
You are in the process of controlling changes to the project scope. All of the following are outputs of this process EXCEPT:
Which of the following statements are true regarding bar charts?
Which of the following scheduling techniques focuses on managing buffer activity durations and the resources applied to the planned scheduled activities, instead of managing the total float of network paths?
Keeping up with the growth was becoming a problem for a privately owned Chinese financial services company. Although it easily lured business from state-owned competitors, low skill levels and weak accounting systems threaten the company's cash flow. Moreover, poorly invested assets were delivering inadequate returns. Hence, you have been assigned over an existing project to upgrade the IT system to allow for an expansion. Specifically, the IT upgrade will enable the company to serve more competitors, expand the product line, gain market share, and win more licenses. The previous project manager for the project lacked an understanding of project management principles. In fact, upon close investigation, you've determined that the project lacks clearly defined project deliverables and lacks management control. Which of the following would be the BEST approach to resolve these short comings?
You are the project manger at a leading manufacturer of consumer electronics, personal computers and peripherals. Unfortunately, your company is facing a rapidly maturing market characterized by consolidation and commoditization. Hence you have been assigned a project to drive growth and profit by integrating an online CRM (costumer relationship management) solution. Industry benchmarks suggest the CRM solution should generate $100-$300M in bottom the benefits. The project timeline is very aggressive and a lot is at stake with this project. Hence every week you report on the progress and status of the project to all the stakeholders and project sponsors. Your project team has already completed the project initials and project planning activities and received sign off and approval on the project charter, project scope and detailed work packages. Your project team is in the process of completing all the work packages. The project time line is very aggressive and your project has a SPI of 1.2 and CPI of1.3. Final review of the project deliverables have been scheduled for the end of the months. Unfortunately as your project near completion you are informed that your project is being cancelled since the resulting product is unacceptable and does not meet the business needs of the organization. Which of the following is most likely cause of this scenario?
Which of the following is true regarding configuration control board?
Which of the following is configuration management activity that is involved with ensuring that the performance and the functional requirement defined in the configuration document have been met?
You are a project manager responsible for constructing a new sports arena in preparation of upcoming Olympics. Construction begins on the project over a year ago. The stakeholder of a project wants a status report on the performance of the project to date. Unfortunately you are afraid to tell your stakeholders that your project is coming in significant behind schedule. In fact schedule delays are so severe that the rebaselining of the project schedule is required. Which of the following statement are true?
All are the part of scope baseline except:
Risk monitoring and control process involves all of the following except:
You are a project manager at java ice cream factory. You are currently supervising the manufacturing of new flavor ice cream java bean, burgundy crunch. The manufacturing of this flavor was proceeding as planned, until a manufacturing error occurred that requires corrective action to be taken. Ironically the manufacturing error resulted in a new variant of the flavor. Product team really thinks that flavor would be a success in a marketplace. They have asked you to cancel the corrective action, and integrate this serendipitous discovery in the manufacturing process. As a project manager you have realized that this has resulted in a change in project scope. Which of the following statement are true?
You are a project manager for a company that sells online music. Your project is to develop a new content management system that will not only manage all users purchase downloads, but will automatically learn the users music interests in order to make future product recommendations. In addition your content management system must scale to support millions of concurrent music downloads a day. Your team has made significant progress on the project. You are preparing the performance of a project to date and have calculated the following measurements. PV=4,000 EV= 3,500 AC= 3,000 Which of the following statements are true?
Which of the following statements are true regarding project risk management?
Which of the following statements are true regarding cost and schedule variances?
You are the project manager for the company that sells online music. Your project is to develop a new content management system that will not only manage all users purchases and downloads, but will automatically learn the users music interests in order to make future product recommendations. In addition your content management system must scale to support millions of concurrent music downloads a day. Your team has made significant progress on the project. You are preparing the performance of a project to date and have calculated the following measurements. PV=4,000 EV= 3,500 AC= 3,000 What is the SPI of this project?
Which of the following statements are false regarding the cost change control system?
Which of the following statements are NOT techniques used to resolve conflicts on a project?
Which of the following s most likely to require a rebaselining in order to provide a realistic measure of performance?
One of your friends is a manager at telecommunications company. She is currently managing a project developing a VoIP (Voice over IP) gateway that addresses the challenges facing service providers deploying packer-based voice networks. The gateway offers a comprehensive approach to implementing high-density carrier-class voice over packet gateway applications. She is in the process of developing the project schedule, and has determined that the project has 4 critical paths. Which of the following BEST describes how the project will be impacted?
You are the project manager within a large multi-national company. Your current project involves a large software development project that involves coordination of resources across four different reengineering teams across three different countries. Specifically your UI team is based in India, your database team and middleware team is in U.S., and your QA team is in Canada. The engineers in each of the team report to geographic functional manger, but are currently on loan to you for your project. You are currently in the process of assessing the completion status for each work packages. In order to develop an accurate status of the project, you've asked each of the engineers to report their percentage complete for their respective deliverables. However, when asked for the percentage completion status, one of the QA engineers innocently responds, "Percentage complete of what exactly?" ever since the project started you've always thought that this QA engineer was difficult to manage. Especially tired of such comments, you finally decided to report to the QA engineer's functional manager regarding the engineer's lack of cooperation. Based on the scenario described above, which of the following BEST describes the real problem?
You are in the process of controlling changes to the project cost baseline. Which of the following is the LEAST helpful tool/ technique?
Which of the following statements are FALSE regarding project time management?
The applied level of change control is LEAST dependent upon:
Which of the following calculates the difference between the budget at completion and estimate at completion?
Which of the following best describes this illustration?
Approved corrective actions are an input to which process?
Change control system, variance analysis, replanning and configuration management systems are tool/ techniques of which process?
You are project manager responsible for constructing a new sports arena for the upcoming Olympics. Construction began on a project over a year ago. The stakeholders of the project want a status report on the performance of the project to date. You've obtained the following measurements: BAC=500, ETC=200, PV=500, AC=200, EV=300, CPI=1.5 You believe the type of variances that have occurred on the project to date are typical, and do not expect these variances to continue. What is the VAC for the project?
Which of the following consists of tools and techniques used to gather, integrate, and disseminate the outputs of the project management processes?
You are the project manager at the Java Ice Cream Factory. You are currently supervising the manufacturing of a new flavor of ice cram JavaBean Burgundy Crunch. The manufacturing of this new flavor was proceeding as planned, until a manufacturing error occurred that requires corrective actions to be taken. To ensure the effectiveness of corrective actions, corrective actions frequently require which of the following?
All of the following statements are TRUE regarding ground rules EXCEPT:
You are in the process of reviewing all change requests and controlling changes to deliverables and organizational process assets. All of the following are INPUTS except:
Which of the following BEST describes the procedures by which the project schedule can change, and includes the paperwork, tracking systems, and approval levels necessary for authorizing changes?
The administrative closure procedure is an output of the close project process. It is an input to which process?
You are the project manager at a large accounting firm in the United States. Throughout the year your firm provides both consulting services and accounting/ auditing services to XYZ Widgets, Inc, a publicly traded company listed on the New York Stock Exchange. Currently, your project involves auditing the financial statements of XYZ Widgets Inc, in preparation for the annual shareholders/ investors meeting. While your team is in the midst of project execution, you are informed that your project is due to new SEC regulations. Specifically, a new SEC regulation prohibits accounting firms from providing both consulting services and auditing services to a client, due to potential conflicts of interest that could arise from such business relationships. As a result, your project is cancelled, and the budget for your project is cut. Without the necessary budget, your project team is disbanded and your project team members go to their separate ways. Which of the following statements are true?
The administrative closure procedure that is an output of the close project process includes all of the following EXCEPT:
In which of the following documents will you find specific procedures for contract closure?
Which of the following statements are FALSE regarding the relationship between project phase and project life cycles?
All of the following are outputs of the close project process EXCEPT:
Your project is coming to an end, and you are in the process of listing the activities that must be performed to close out the project. Which of the following should be performed during the closing processes?
Which of the following documents formally indicates that the customer or sponsor has officially accepted the project deliverables?
Historical record from previous project are generally used for all of the following EXCEPT:
One of your friends is a manager at telecommunications company. She is currently managing a project developing a VoIP (Voice over IP) gateway that addresses the challenges facing service providers deploying packer-based voice networks. The gateway offers a comprehensive approach to implementing high-density carrier-class voice over packet gateway applications. All the technical work has already been completed on the project, and the project is in the closing phase. All of the following should be performed at this stage EXCEPT:
Which of the following statements are true regarding the procurement audit?
You have been recently hired to be a project manager at a bio-tech company to develop anew drug for the treatment of malignant melanoma. As part of feasibility study, your team has been evaluating the feasibility for such a drug using computer simulation. Your team has just completed one of the project phases by designing a potential chemical compound using a sophisticated computer model. You would like to have model reviewed prior to deciding whether to move to the next phase of the project. According to the PMI, these type of reviews are called:
Which of the following formulas is used to calculate the SPI (schedule performance index)?
Which of the following statements are false regarding the administrative closure procedure?
Contract file and formal acceptance and closure are outputs of which processes?
Product verification is usually performed in the closing process. Which of the following statements are true?
You are in the process of controlling changes to project cost baseline. Which of the following is the LEAST helpful input?
A WBS can be used foe all of the following EXCEPT:
Recommended corrective actions are an input to which process?
You are the project manager at a large accounting firm in the United States. Your current project involves auditing the financial statements of a Fortune 100 company. You are currently utilizing network diagrams to track and schedule the execution of various auditing tasks through out the project. You are performing a backward pass analysis of the project schedule. It is important for you to examine activities that have _________ slack?
Which of the following objectives is LEAST likely accomplish by implementing a project-wide application of the configuration management system?
Your company is making a strategy shift: form being focused on fulfilling customer requests for becoming the best cost dairy producer in industry. Its existing cost manufacturing cost system, however fails to capture the costs associated with handling special flavors, small production orders, and complex delivery and order processing options. Hence you've been assigned to supervise an existing project to develop a new time-drive, activity-based costing system that will capture the full complexity of the company's operations and gives managers new insights into the profitability orders, products, and customers. Senior management will use the information to enhance process efficiencies, negotiating new terms with customers, and attempt to win new business. The project timeline is very aggressive and a lot is at stake with this project. Hence, every week you report on the progress and status of the project to all the necessary stakeholders and sponsors. Your project team has already completed all the initial and project planning activities and received sign-off and approvals on the project charter, project scope, and detailed work packages. Your project team is in the process of completing all the work packages. Te project timeline is very aggressive, and your project has the SPI of 1.2 and CPI of 1.3. A final review of the project deliverables has been scheduled foe the end of the month. Unfortunately, as your project near completion, you are informed that your project is being cancelled since the resulting product is unacceptable and does not meet the business needs of the organization. All the resources on your project are being reassigned to another project. Which of the following is the MOST likely cause of this scenario?
Which of the following calculates how much additional budget is required in order to complete the project, assuming the current project performance to date?
Which of the following is most likely to require a rebaselining of the cost baseline in order to provide a realistic measure of performance?
All of the following are FALSE regarding bar charts EXCEPT:
All of the following statements are true regarding the cost control process EXCEPT:
You have been assigned to a project to build the largest U.S. natural gas pipeline project in more than 20 years. The proposed 1,350-mile, 42-inch diameter pipeline will provide valuable infrastructure allowing producers in the Rocky Mountain region to deliver their natural gas to attractive markets in the Midwest and northeastern parts of the U.S. You are in the process of developing the schedule for the project and you have given the following activity duration estimates. However the project sponsor would like to share a few weeks off the project duration. Which activity should you shorten in order to reduce the overall duration of the project?
You are a project manager at a real estate company that develops and manages commercial, retail and residential properties in United States and Europe. As a company continues to grow, the company's IT infrastructure is unable to meet business needs of organization. Specifically, you have been assigned to upgrade the company's IT infrastructure. Specifically, your team has been asked to implement a corporate general ledger system, improve accounting and real estate processes, develop and implement lease tracking system, and implement HR and payroll systems and perform diagnostics and monthly closures. Your project team has already completed all the initiating / project planning activities and received sign-off approvals on the project charter, project scope, and detailed work packages. Your project team is in the process of completing all the work packages. However, your client has just file a change request to add additional reporting functionality to the IT application. Fortunately you have already determined that this functionality will only add one week to the critical path. To accommodate with the request, you've determined that you could compress the schedule to recover one extra week. Which of the following should you perform NEXT?
All of the following are reporting techniques used in the Cost control process EXCEPT:
With respect to value analysis which of the following is the portion of the approved cost estimate that has been budgeted for an activity during a certain time period?
You are in the process of reviewing all change requests and controlling changes to deliverables and organizational process asset. All of the following are inputs you need EXCEPT:
Which of the following are true regarding statistical perform quality control?
You are a project manager responsible for constructing a new sports arena in preparation for upcoming Olympics. Construction begins on a project over a year ago. Stakeholders of the project want a status report on the performance of the project to the date. You have obtained the following measurement: BAC=500, ETC=200, PV=500, AC=200, EV=300, CPI=1.5 You believe the type of variances that have occurred on the project to date to be atypical. Based on the information above what will be the EAC for the project?
All of the following statements are true except:
Which of the following are true regarding project scope management?
Inspections are a tool of perform quality process. They may also be called?
You are a project manager responsible for constructing a new sports arena in preparation for upcoming Olympics. Construction begins on a project over a year ago. Stakeholders of the project want a status report on the performance of the project to the date. Unfortunately you are afraid to tell stakeholder that project is coming in significantly behind schedule. In fact schedule delays are so severe that the rebaselining of the project is required. Which of the following statements are true?
Which of the following statement are correct regarding managing stakeholders except:
You are a project manager responsible for constructing a new sports arena in preparation for upcoming Olympics. Construction begins on a project over a year ago. Stakeholders of the project want a status report on the performance of the project to the date. You have obtained the following measurement: BAC=500, ETC=200, PV=500, AC=200, EV=300, CPI=1.5 You believe the type of variances that have occurred on the project to date to be atypical, and except these variances to continue. Based on the information above what will be the VAC for the project?
All of the statements are false regarding variance analysis?
Which of the following statements are false regarding project time management?
Which of the following risk management processes are workarounds identified?
All of the following statements are true regarding ground rules except:
You are the project manager in the I.T department of major hospital. Your current project involves developing a web based interface for legacy mainframe software applications. Your current project involves a scope change. You are documenting the physical characteristics and functionality of the project, based on this scope change. Which of the following tool are using?
You are in the process of monitoring the various project processes and their performance. Which of the following are you least concerned with during the process?
You are a project manager for a company that sells online music. Your project is to develop new content management system that will not only manage all users purchases and downloads but will automatically learn the users music interest to make future product recommendation. In addition your content management system must scale to support millions of current music downloads a day. Your team has made a significant progress on the project. You are preparing the performance of the project to date and have calculated the following measurement: PV=4000, EV=3500, AC=3000 Which of the following statement are true?
One of your friends is project manager in Telecommunication Company. She is currently managing a project developing a voice over IP. The gateway offers a comprehensive approach to implementing high density, carrier class voice over packet gateway applications. She is in the process of developing the project schedule, and has determined that the project has 44 critical paths. Which of the following best describe how the project will be impacted?
Which of the following describes the input to the direct and manage project execution that is used to bring the project back in line and is the part of feedback loop?
The risk monitoring and control process involves all of the following except:
You are project manager at a large multinational company developing a next generation mobile phone using voice over IP technology. The project involves significant coordination of resources across multiple different engineering teams located in various different countries. Specifically your mobile handset team is based in India, your design team in U.S.A, and your QA team in Canada. You are currently in the process of assessing the completion status of each of the work packages. In order to develop a accurate status of project, you have asked each of the engineer to report their completion date for their respective deliverables. However one of the QA engineer abrasively respond" completion date for what?" you finally decided to report QA engineer's uncooperative behavior to his functional manager. Based on the scenario above, which of the following best describes the problem?
Which of the following statements are false regarding cost and schedule variances?
The cost of quality often refers to cost to produce a product or service according to specific quality standards. Which of the following is not cost associated with the cost quality?
You are in the process of controlling changes to the project schedule. All of the following are the inputs to the process except:
The applied level of change control is least dependent upon:
Which of the following is an effective tool to observe trends and results over a specified period of time?
Which of the following are not situations where pre-assignment of project team members are known in advance?
You are in the process of directing the performance of a planned project activities and managing various technical and organizational interfaces that exist within your project. All of the following are required inputs EXCEPT:
Which of the following best describes the conflict that arises when a project team member has dual reporting relationship between a functional manager and project manager?
You are evaluating several different motivational strategies to motivate your project team. You subscribe to the belief that pray and salary may prevent job dissatisfaction, but will not lead to long term job satisfaction. You believe that over the long run pay and salary are NOT motivators. Which of the following motivational theories are you applying?
Which of the following process groups are in loop back relationship with the other, where each process group serves as inputs to the other?
You are the project manager for a software company developing wireless mobile application. You are currently in the Risk Identification process where you are trying to identify and document all the risks that might impact your project. You have assemble your experts in one room for face-to-face discussion. You intend to use a face-to-face group judgment technique in which participants generate silently, in writing, responses to a given question/problem; responses are collected and posted, but not identified by author, for all to see; responses are openly clarified, often in a round-robin format, further iterations may follow; and a final set of responses is established by voting/ranking. Which technique are you using?
According to Maslow's hierarchy of needs in which does the need for acceptance occurs?
Which of the following statements are true regarding the project human resource management processes?
With respect top cost of quality, which of the following individuals suggested that 85% of the cost of quality is a management problem?
You are the project manager responsible for constructing new 100-unit apartment in downtown Manhattan. As part of construction project, you are planning to outsource a particular deliverable of your project. You have created a document that described the product and services required in detail and have included the necessary reporting requirements. Which of the following BEAST describes the document you have just prepared?
Which of the following describes an input to the direct and manage execution process that consists of documented, authorized requests for product correction of a defect found during quality inspection?
Which of the following LEAST likely describes a weighting system used in the Select Sellers process?
Which of the following statements are FALSE regarding recognition and rewards?
All of the following are another terms of bidder conferences EXCEPT:
Which of the following conflict resolution techniques describes a loselose situation where one of the parties involved in the conflict reduces to discuss the conflict, and hence, a resolution is never achieved
You are a project manager at java ice cream factory. You are currently supervising the manufacturing of new flavor ice cream java bean, burgundy crunch. The manufacturing of this flavor was proceeding as planned, until a manufacturing error occurred that requires corrective action to be taken. Ironically the manufacturing error resulted in a new variant of the flavor. Product team really thinks that flavor would be a success in a marketplace. They have asked you to cancel the corrective action, and integrate this serendipitous discovery in the manufacturing process. As a project manager you have realized that this has resulted in a change in project scope. Which of the following statement are FALSE?
You are the project manger at an advertising firm that specializes in marketing and promotional campaign for athletic shoes. Your company frequently uses sports celebrities as part of the marketing and advertising campaigns. Advertising that uses celebrities to influence consumer's purchasing decisions is an example of what type of power?
Which of the following statements are FALSE regarding the process improvement plan?
Which of the following would LEAST likely to be found as part of a contract?
You are the project manger at a construction company. Your company is currently in the process of developing a 500-unit apartment complex. Your company plans to subcontract all the electrical wiring of the building to an outside vendor. The subcontractor's work will involve wiring the building for electrical power, as well as cable and Internet Ethernet wiring. In which of the following processes will a contract between the buyer and seller be created?
You are the project manager of a company that is building ATM software for a large bank and financial institutions. You have been told that the ATM software must meet very stringent quality standards. Including rigorous auditing of all transactions, ability to recover in case of software/ hardware errors, and fraud detection/analysis and robust two-factor authentication. The ATM system is currently in production, when a quality problem is identified with a PIN card reader. This problem will require with a downtime of the manufacturing process while networks of the unit are performed. Fortunately, the units have not been shipped, to customers yet. Which of the following best describes the cost of quality associated with this problem?
Which of the following is NOT one of the five project management process groups?
You are involved in monitoring specific project results to determine whether they comply with relevant quality standards. You are using a control chart to illustrate how a process is behaving over time. You've constructed your control chart and determined that all the data points are within the upper and lower control limits of the chart. In addition, seven consecutive data points are observed to be on the one side of the mean. Which of the following is your BEST plan of action?
You are currently in the process of acquiring your project team and are working with functional managers to ensure that the project receives the appropriate staff during the required time frame. Which of the following BEST describes the tool/ technique you are using?
Consider the project integration management knowledge area. Which of the following process are included?
Project information can be shared by tam members and stakeholders through a variety of methods. Which of the following are NOT considered information retrieval systems?
Which of the following describes the assumptions made by the theory X style of management?
Information retrieval systems, information distribution methods, and communication skills are tools/ techniques of which of the following processes?
Which of the following project quality management process is within the executing process group?
You are the project manager at a construction company. Your company is in the process of developing a 500-unit apartment complex. Your company has subcontracted all the electrical wiring of the building to XYZ Electrical. The subcontractor's work involved wiring the building for electrical power, as well as cable and Internet/Ethernet wiring. The subcontractor has just completed the work, and you are in process of inspecting his work. However, you've just discovered that the subcontractor forgot to install the Cat-5 Ethernet/Internet cabling throughout the building. The subcontractor's performance did not meeting the contractor requirements. Which of the following statements are true?
The contract management plan is an output of which process?
Your are in the process o reviewing offers and choosing among potential sellers. All of the following are tools you can use except:
You have just completed the progress planning process group and are ready to begin the project executing process group. You will need to perform all the following executing processes except:
Which of the following are not the direct result of managing the team?
You are in the process of obtaining necessary human resource to complete the project. All the following are tools you can use except:
Which of the following types of contracts requires the greatest amount of time to monitor and audit?
All of the following statements are true regarding the communications management plan EXCEPT:
You have been assigned to a project to build a large 30-story condominium in Las Vegas. The condominium will feature luxurious amenities like state of the art work-out facilities, conference centers, valet services, maid services, spas, gourmet dining and resort style pools. You have already finished the planning processes and have already begun construction. However, during project execution, a large number of changes are being made to the project. Which of the following BEST response to these changes?
You in the project executing process group, and would like to confirm the implementation of approved change request, corrective actions, and defect repairs. Which of the following tool/technique can you leverage?
Which of the following processes best describes the project human resource management knowledge area?
You are currently in the marker for the new car. You are debating between two different cars. Car ABC is highly reliable car with an excellent track record. However, car ABC lacks some premium equipment, such as high-end audio system and sports suspension. On the other hand, car XYZ comes standard with various premium equipment including a sports suspension and high-end audio system. However, car XYZ is much les reliable and would require more frequent maintenance and repairs. How would you characterized the two cars?
You are a project manager for the manufacture of children's toys. Your project team is in the process of designing a new children toy for new year Christmas season. Your project team has worked together for the last six months, and has become a self directed team, with little, if any supervision required. A new member has just added to the team. Which of the following statements are true?
Which of the following statement are false?
Which of the following techniques do project manager used most often to resolve conflicts?
You are the part of construction project team responsible for developing a new stadium. The project has been ongoing for the past several months. Your project team has just completed the initial project budget and schedule and is ensure what to do next. Which of the following would you recommend as the NEXT BEST action to perform?
Which of the following statements regarding the project charter is FALSE?
Which of the following documents initiates a project and authorizes the project manager to assign organizational resources to the project?
You are currently the project manager for a software development project, developing a next generation data-mining tool. Your team is developing a new software product that will help customers better manage large volumes of data, especially for data reporting purposes. Midway, through the project, your engineer decide to add additional reporting functionality to better analyze correlate data. Although this functionality was NOT part of the original project plan, this feature seems like it could be a useful feature for the customer. This is an example of which of the following?
You have been recently hired to be a project manager at a bio-tech company to develop anew drug to treat pancreatic cancer. The project requires significant coordination across multiple departments from R&D to manufacturing. You've attempt to gain the cooperation of chief scientist (who reports to the V.P. of R&D) within the R&D department. You need her assistance to answer some questions regarding the clinical testing process of this new drug. However, the chief scientist is un-interested in your project and provides little or no feed back to your questions. Since your project is NOT one of her priorities, she's been rather unresponsive to your questions. What should you do in this situation?
One of your friends is a project manager at a computer security company. She is currently managing a project for the development of a NAC (network admissions control) appliance that uses the network infrastructure to enforce security policy compliance on all devices seeking to access network computing resources, thereby limiting damage from emerging security threats. The NAC appliance will provide with self-contained endpoint assessment, policy management, and remediation services. The company had performed a similar project a couple years ago. This is critical project fro the company, and he is under tremendous pressure to deliver the project. Unfortunately, he is new in the company, and the project is growing in size everyday. He is starting to feel overwhelmed by the project. What is his BEST course of action?
You are the project manager at Day-Old donuts a rapidly growing franchise selling premium donuts at a discount. Currently, your company is planning on opening additional stores throughout Europe. Your company is evaluating different areas for expansion including France, Germany and England. Your steering committee used a weighted score model and found that in England with a score of 75, provided the best opportunities for expansion. Which of the following statements are true?
When should a project manager be assigned to a project?
According to the PMI, who should develop the project charter?
In which of the following processes in the initial process group is one responsible for producing a high-level definition of the project and documenting the project requirements, deliverables and method of acceptance?
Which of the following terms best describe the approach used by organizations to treat aspects of ongoing operations as project in order to apply project management technique to them?
Which of the following statements are true regarding the difference between a project expediter and coordinator roles?
You are the project manager at Happy Coffee Cafe, a rapidly growing franchise selling premium blended coffee. Currently, your company is planning on opening additional stores throughout Europe. Your company is evaluating different areas for expansion, including France, Germany, and England. Based on your market analysis, you have obtained the following information: England-IRR (33%), payback period (1.5 years) France-IRR (45%), payback period (1.1 years) Germany-IRR (36%), payback period (0.75 years)
Suppose your company has acquired a high end server three years ago for $100,000. The server's current book value is $20,000. The $20,000 book value sis best considered a:
Which of the following statements are true regarding decision models using multi objective programming algorithms?
You are in the process of developing an approximation of the costs of the resources needed to complete each schedule activity. Which of the following statements are FALSE regarding this process?
Which of the following best describes the calculations of late finish dates and late start dates for the uncompleted portions of all network activities?
You are an information security project manager responsible for securing your cooperate network. Due to new regulations mandated by the Sarbanes-Oxley act your company's upper management has tasked you with securing the company's network infrastructure. Unfortunately, you lacked detailed knowledge regarding firewall and IPS-related technologies. You are relying on an outside security consulting firm to provide you with expert judgment regarding these technologies. You are trying to forecast how often you'll require their expert judgment during your project. Expert judgment is a tool/ technique in all of the following processes EXCEPT:
Which of the following process takes the activities that are defined in the WBS and activity list, and accesses the amount of time required to complete these activities?
Which of the following processes utilize rolling wave planning as a tool/ technique?
A risk impact scale that uses rank-ordered values as very low, low, moderate, and high is considered:
A poorly defined staffing management plan will LEAST directly impact:
The detailed project scope statement includes all of the following EXCPET:
You have been hired as a project manager for a local bank. Bank wants to develop and design the custom online bill pay software so that its customer can pay bills online. You are ready to begin the activity duration estimates for your project. Two years ago you were involved in prior project where a team of ten programmers were able to create similar bill pay software in 180 days. Therefore in estimating the duration of this new project, you decided to use 180 days as an estimate. This is an example of which type of estimating technique?
All of the following can be used to estimate contingency reserves during activity duration estimating except:
Which of the following processes is involved with allocating the overall cost estimate to individual work activities?
You are in the process of analyzing activity sequence, durations, resource requirement, and schedule constraints in order to create the project schedule. Which of the following is least helpful input in this process?
Risks that may affect the project can be identified and organized into risk categories. Which of the following is a not possible risk category?
Risk diagramming techniques include all of the following except:
You are in the process of identifying and documenting risk project. You are using various information gathering techniques to identify the project risks. All of the following are information gathering techniques except:
You are a project manager at construction company, assigned to repaint the 30-story building. One of the initial tasks are to scrape the original paint off the building and then to prime the building. But before the building can be primed, the original paint must be scraped off the building. However priming can begin while scraping is underway. The two tasks can progress in parallel. Which of the following relationship type best describes this dependency between scraping and priming?
Which of the following are true regarding project risk management?
You are using three point estimating technique to estimate the estimate of a scheduled activity. Which of the following statement are true given the following data: [Pessimistic=100 days] [Optimistic=40 days] [Most likely=65 days] Assuming a beta distribution you calculate that the duration average=66.6 days and duration variance=100. Assuming a triangular distribution you calculate that the duration average=68.33 days, and duration variance=151.38
You are the project manger assigned to perform seismic retro-fitting on an old office building. You are trying to estimate the costs for this project. You start by assigning the costs associated with each of the project activities. Then you sum up all the individual costs into a final cost estimate. Which type of cost estimating technique id you see?
You are the project manager for a software company that develops children's video games. You have been assigned to develop a new game that makes mathematics fun for children. You need to gather necessary information to write the project scope management plan. Which of the following information do you NOT need as inputs to your current process?
Which of the following statements are true regarding the critical path of a project schedule?
All of the following statements regarding the risk breakdown structure (RBS) is true EXCEPT:
You are in the process of estimating the number of work periods that will be needed to complete individual schedule activities. All of the following are tools/ techniques you can use EXCEPT:
Which of the following statements regarding Schedule Network Analysis is true EXCEPT:
Which of the following is typically displayed as a S-shaped curve?
Cost aggregation, reserve analysis, funding limit reconciliation, and parametric estimating are tool/ techniques of which process?
All of the following statements are true regarding the cost baseline EXCEPT:
You are a project manager developing a project plan for the renovation of historic landmark. You are in the process of performing some risk planning. your risk management plan should include all of he following except:
Planning components are tools of activity definition process. Which of the following are planning components?
Which of the following are the part of WBS dictionary except:
All of the following statements regarding decision tree analysis are true except:
In which of the following contract type will the buyer assume the highest risk for cost overrun and non-performance?
With respect to risk management, which of the following are not true regarding decision tree analysis?
You are currently in the process of prioritizing risks by their impact and probability of occurance. Which of the following tool/technique is least useful?
Quantitative risk analysis involves all of the following except:
Which of the following statements are false regarding sensitivity analysis?
Which of the following document include a code of account identifier, a statement of work, and a list of schedule milestones for each WBS component?
Which of the following statements are true regarding various activity scheduling tools?
All of the statements regarding Planning Packages are true EXPECT:
Product analysis is a / technique of which of the following prosses?
Your project team is already created the WBS, developed estimates for the work packages, and sequenced the project activities using the precedence diagramming method. Which action should be performed NEXT?
You are in the process of identifying and documenting the project roles and responsibilities and create staffing management plan. All of the following are environmental factors that should be considered during this process EXCEPT:
All of the following scheduling techniques account for resource limitations/ availability EXCEPT:
The outputs from risk identification are usually contained in the document called a risk register. All of the following should be included in the risk register upon completion of the risk identification process EXCEPT:
You are using the three-point estimating technique to estimate the duration of a schedule activity. Which of the following is the correct formula for calculating variance assuming a beta distribution?
You are the project manger assigned to build the house. You have determined the dependencies between activities on the project. One of the activity dependencies is that the foundation of the house must be created prior to the construction of the frame which of the following is true?
You are in the process of identifying and documenting the logical relationships among schedule activities. Which of the following are NOT outputs to this process?
You have been recently assigned to provide an accurate project schedule for a large construction company. You are evaluating the network diagram for the construction project. Your lead engineer has given you the following estimates for several critical path activity: 30 days (optimistic), 80 days (pessimistic), and 40 days (most likely). Which of the following dates can you commit with approximately a 95 percent confidence level, assuming a beta distribution?
All of following are types of strategies that one can use to deal with negative risk/threats EXCEPT:
You are in the process of identifying and documenting the project roles and responsibilities and create staffing management plan. Which of the following are outputs of this process EXCEPT:
The procurement management plan describes how the procurement processes will be managed. All of the following should be documented in the procurement management plan EXCEPT:
Which of the following best describes the schedule development process?
All of the statements regarding rolling wave planning is TRUE EXCEPT:
You are the project manager for a construction company. You are currently estimating how long it will take to perform the electrical wiring of the building. You estimate that there are about 5,000 meters of wiring required. You also estimate that your project team can wire 20 meters/hour. Hence you estimate that wiring will take approximately 250 hours. Which of the following estimating techniques did you apply in your analysis?
Which of the following statements are false regarding the probability impact matrix?
You are in the process of estimating the type and quality of resources needed to complete individual schedule activities. All of the following are outputs of this process EXCEPT:
You are in the process of numerically analyzing the effects of identified risks. Which of the following are not tool/ techniques you can use in this process?
Which of the following represents a hierarchically organized depiction of the resources to be used on the project?
You are the project manager for a software company that develops sports-based video games. You have been assigned to develop a new 3D interactive basket ball video game. You have just completed the development of the project scope management plan. Which of the following processes did you just complete?
Which of the following is LEAST likely to improve the accuracy of cost estimates produced through parametric cost estimating techniques?
What is the total slack for the following project?
Which of the following best describes why one would use a resource histogram versus a responsibility assignment matrix?
Which of the following statements are true regarding the critical chain method?
Which of the following statement regarding WBS are true?
You are a project manager at an utility company. Due to the recent rise in the cost of petroleum, the market demand for cheaper, alternate forms of energy have grown exponentially. Your company has identified, a multi billion dollar market opportunity for alternate forms of energy. However your organization does not have enough resources and expertise to exploit this market opportunity. Hence your organization has decided to form joint ventures and risk sharing relationship with various other utility companies to coordinate research and development activities. Which of he following best describes the best strategy you are using with this market opportunity?
Which of the following are the outputs of the activity resource estimating process?
You are a project manager at day-old donuts, a rapidly growing franchise selling premium donuts at a discount. Currently your company is planning for opening new stores throughout the United States. You have been asked to open a store in Manhattan, New York. Construction on new store is about to begin. This corporate head quarter wants to be informed when construction is nearly complete, so they can produce all the supplies and inventories just in time. You have been given a project charter, progressively elaborate the requirements, and have just completed the scope definition/create WBS processes. However while you are in activity definition process, you realize that certain deliverables are missing from create WBS process. What is your next plan of action?
The risk register describes all identified risks. Which of the following is not including as a part of risk register?
You are the project manager at information technology division of a large financial services firm in the United States. Your company offers a web based trading platform that provides options and futures trading for U.S commodities market. Due to the rise in popularity in futures and options trading, your company has grown rapidly. In fact, due to the rapid growth, the company's infrastructure is unable to meet the growing demands. To keep up with demands, you have bee assigned the responsibilities of upgrading the company's network and computing infrastructure. You have already inspected the existing infrastructure defined the detailed project scope statement for your project. You are in the process of developing the WBS. All of he following are outputs of the following process except:
You are in the process of estimating the number of work periods that will be needed to complete individual schedule activities. All of the following are valuable inputs to this process except:
Which of the following is a planning tool describing how the project team will define the project scope, develop the detailed project scope statement define and develop the work break down structure, verify project scope, and control the project scope?
Which of the following describes how the various risk management processes will be implemented, monitored, and controlled throughout the project and describes the criteria that are used to establish the risk threshold?
All of the following statements regarding management reserves are true EXCEPT:
Which of the following is the amount of time that a scheduled activity may be delayed without delaying the early start of any immediately following schedule activities?
Which of the following are NOT part of the PMI professional code of contact?
Thomas is a project manager at a biotech company. He is an excellent project manager with a very successful track record managing large, complex R&D projects. During his leisure time, Thomas competes in amateur body-building contests. Body-building is an extremely competitive sport. So Thomas takes performance enhancing drugs, such as steroids, in order to maintain his competitive edge. His company does not have any policies prohibiting usage of such performance enhancing drugs. How does this affect his PMI status?
You work at RFID-PM Inc, a publicly traded company that develops RFID technology. Radio Frequency Identification RFID is a method of remotely storing and retrieving data using devices called RFID tags/ transponders. An RFID tag is a small object, such as an adhesive sticker, that can be attached to or incorporated into a product Your friend, Nelson, has asked you for the financial information regarding your company. So you decide to forward him the pro forma financial statements for the upcoming quarterly report that you obtained from your finance department. Have you provided insider information regarding your company?
Which of the following are NOT described in the PMI's member Standards of Conduct?
Which of the following are NOT parts of the PMI professional Code of Conduct?
Integrate change control includes the following activities EXCEPT:
Which of the following statements regarding configuration management systems is LEAST true?
Which of the following statements regarding networking is false?
You are project manager responsible for constructing a new sports arena for the upcoming Olympics. Construction begins on a project over a year ago. The stakeholders of the project want a status report on the performance of the project to date. You've obtained the following measurements: BAC=500, PV=500, AC=200, EV=300, CPI=1.5 You believe the type of variances that have occurred on the project to date are typical expect these variances to continue throughout the project. Based on the information above, what is the ETC for the project?
Which of the following is a configuration management activity that provides the basis from which the configuration of products is defined and verified, products and documents are labeled, and changes are managed?
Which of the following best describes the difference between risk audits and risk reviews?
Project cost control includes all of the following EXCEPT:
You are the project manager at a large investment bank. Your current project involves developing a creative financing solution for a large bio-tech company in order to facilitate the acquisition of another company. Specifically, your project involves issuing convertible debt securities in order to access a new pool of low-cost capital. This transaction is the largest ever convertible transaction in the bio-tech company. Fortunately, your project is a head of schedule and below budget, with a CPI of 1.5 and SPI of 1.2. Hence, you have some flexibility to accept a new work without delaying your current project or exceeding the project budget. Midway through your budget, one of the stakeholders of your project issues a change request to the change control board to add a new task to your project. Specifically, the new work involves developing the risk control system to manage the client company's pension plans. Although you have flexibility to accommodate the work change, you don not understand how the new work fits within the existing project for your current charter. After evaluating the change request, you determine that work is self-contained with no overlap between the existing work and new work. Furthermore, different skill sets are required to implement the change request. Which of the following is the BEST plan of action in this scenario?
You are the project manager at a large automaker in Japan. Your project involves designing the next generation four wheel drive Sports Utility vehicle for the Asian market. Your project team is attempting to determine the right combination of suspension, tires and chassis that will ensure the stability of SUV at high speeds. Your team members are using statistical methods to identify which factors will influence specific variables related to vehicle stability. This method is best described as:
Which of the following statements are true regarding project team management?
Which of the following processes uses the approved project schedule as an input?
You are the project manger at a leading manufacturer of consumer electronics, personal computers and peripherals. Unfortunately, your company is facing a rapidly maturing market characterized by consolidation and commoditization. Hence you have been assigned a project to drive growth and profit by integrating an online CRM (costumer relationship management) solution. Industry benchmarks suggest the CRM solution should generate $100-$300M in bottom the benefits. You've determined the following information so far: Activity X has an early start of day3, early finish of day6, and a late finish of day10. Activity Y is being performed by resource that had been very difficult to obtain. The CPI of the project is 0.8 and the SPI is 1.2. Based on the information above, which of the following areas should cause the MOST concern?
Which of the following best describes what is a workaround?
Which of the following best describes risks that arise as a direct implementation of implementing a risk response?
The monitor and control project work process is performed to monitor project processes and performance. Which of the following are you LEAST concerned with during this process?
You are presented the following schedule data regarding various project activities on the critical path: You are told that the project has a negative float of 4 months. Which activity or activities would you crash to save four months on the project?
You are the project manager at a manufacturer of electronic components. Your company had been a long time market leader in electronic components distribution industry. However, in recent years, the Internet has transformed the competitive landscape. As a result company's market share has been eroding. Hence, your current project involves implementing the company's internet strategies to best exploit these altered dynamics and increase the company's market share. You are in the project planning process, and are personally estimating the time needed for each activity. Once you've created the overall project estimate. You commit to completing the project deliverables to this date. Which of the following BEST explains why this is the INCORRECT way to estimate the schedule?
All of the following statements are true regarding scatter diagrams?
All of the following are examples of quality metrics EXCEPT:
All of the following can be used to reduce the amount of conflict in a project team?
All of the following are part of cost baseline EXCEPT:
Which of the following statements are false?
You are a project manager at a real estate company that develops and manages commercial, retail and residential properties in United States and Europe. As a company continues to grow, the company's IT infrastructure is unable to meet business needs of organization. Specifically, you have been assigned to upgrade the company's IT infrastructure. Specifically, your team has been asked to implement a corporate general ledger system, improve accounting and real estate processes, develop and implement lease tracking system, and implement HR and payroll systems and perform diagnostics and monthly closures. Your project team has already completed all the initiating / project planning activities and received sign-off approvals on the project charter, project scope, and detailed work packages. Your project team is in the process of completing all the work packages. However, you would like to make a minor change to the project management plan. You have already investigated the options on how to implement the change and determined that the change has no effect on the components of the "triple constraints". Which of the following should you perform NEXT?
All of the following statements are true regarding the critical path EXCEPT:
Which of the following is NOT and output of manage stake holders process?
You are currently analyzing the schedule for a project. You've noticed that for a certain activities in the project, large schedule variances exist. Which of the following activities are true?
You are the project manager for the international contract manufacturing firm with manufacturing the plants and offices in India, China and Thailand. Your company design and manufacture various consumer electronics such as flat screen, television, laptop computers, monitors, e.t.c. Your company is currently under contract to manufacture the next generation 128-bit video game console for x-cube station. Work has begun on the project, and you are in the process of confirming the initial work results with stakeholders. You are in the process of working with the stakeholders to confirm acceptance of the initial work results. Which process are you performing?
You are the project manager in the I.T. department of a major hospital. Your current project involves developing a web-based interface for legacy mainframe patient-tracking application. Your current project has recently experienced a change where many of the agreed-upon WBS elements were modified as a result. Which type of change has occurred within your project?
Your company is making a strategy shift: form being focused on fulfilling customer requests for becoming the best cost dairy producer in industry. Its existing cost manufacturing cost system, however fails to capture the costs associated with handling special flavors, small production orders, and complex delivery and order processing options. Hence you've been assigned to supervise an existing project to develop a new time-drive, activity-based costing system that will capture the full complexity of the company's operations and gives managers new insights into the profitability orders, products, and customers. Senior management will use the information to enhance process efficiencies, negotiating new terms with customers, and attempt to win new business. Unfortunately, you have very limited knowledge of this technical area. Fortunately, some of your project team members are highly technical, and hence you've decided to delegate most of the project management activities to them. Specifically, you have delegated schedule development, cost estimating, an assignment of project activities to your technical team members, while you serve as an occasional coordinator of project activities. Which of the following will be the MOST likely result of this arrangement?
You are in the process of controlling changes to the project scope. All of the following are tools/techniques you can use EXCEPT:
The Estimate At Completion (EAC) can be used to forecast the most likely total project cost based upon the current project performance. Which of the following formulas cannot be used to calculate the EAC when past estimating assumptions are incorrect or past assumptions are no longer relevant?
Quality audits are a tool/technique of which of the following processes?
The risk monitoring and control process involves all of the following EXCEPT:
Keeping up with the growth was becoming a problem for a privately owned Chinese financial services company. Although it easily lured business from state-owned competitors, low skill levels and weak accounting systems threaten the company's cash flow. Moreover, poorly invested assets were delivering inadequate returns. Hence, you have been assigned over an existing project to upgrade the IT system to allow for an expansion. Specifically, the IT upgrade will enable the company to serve more competitors, expand the product line, gain market share, and win more licenses. You've determined the following information so far: Activity X has an early start of day3, early finish of day6, and a late finish of day10. Activity Y is being performed by resource that had been very difficult to obtain. The CPI of the project is 1.2 and the SPI is 1.3. Midway through your project, your client has requested additional deliverables to your project. Fortunately, you have already determined that this functionality will only add one extra week to the critical path. To accommodate this request, you've determined that you could fasttrack the schedule to recover one extra week. Which of the following should you perform NEXT?
You are the project manager at a manufacturer of electronic components. Your company had been a long time market leader in electronic components distribution industry. However, in recent years, the Internet has transformed the competitive landscape. As a result company's market share has been eroding. Hence, your current project involves implementing the company's internet strategies to best exploit these altered dynamics and increase the company's market share. Unfortunately, your project is plagued by frequent changes to the project charter. Who should be the primary person responsible for deciding whether the changes to the project charter are necessary?
You are in the process of controlling changes to the project schedule. All of the following are tool/ techniques of this process EXCEPT:
Which of the following statements are true regarding the SPI (schedule performance index) measurement?
All of the following statements are true regarding a change control system EXCEPT:
You are in the process of monitoring the various project processes and their performance. Which of the following is the LEAST appropriate tool/ technique to use in this process?
Which of the following best describes a conflict resolution technique the temporarily solves a problem by downplaying the problem to make the problem appear less important/ critical?
You are in the process of controlling changes to the project cost baseline. Which of the following is the LEAST helpful tool / technique?
With respect to the earned value analysis, which of the following will tell you whether costs are higher or lower than budgeted?
Which of the following techniques may be used on a project to resolve conflicts?
Consider the project integration management knowledge area. Which of the following process are NOT included?
Which of the following best describes the expectancy theory of motivation?
Which of the following process involves making needed information available to project stakeholders in a timely manner?
You have been recently hired to be a project manager at a bio-tech company to develop anew drug for the treatment for diabetes. George is your chief scientist. Over the past few years, George has helped the company develop various patents and technologies with regard to treating diabetes. To say the least, George is critical to company's success. Lately, George has been demanding a 50% increase in his salary. He is threatening to leave the company if he does not receive a salary increase. Which type of power is George yielding in order to get his pay increase?
All of the following knowledge area process do NOT have processes in the Executing process group EXCEPT:
You are a project manager for the manufacture of children's toys. Your project team is in the process of designing a new children toy for New Year Christmas season. With the rapidly approaching deadline, your team members are frequently arguing with each other, even if they agree on some real issues. Within, your team there is a strong resistance to quality approaches and resistance to new tasks. Which of the following stages of develop project team best describes your team?
Which of the following statements are FALSE regarding Herzberg's Hygiene Theory?
You are a project manager at a biotech company, where you are leading a cross functional team to develop a treatment for diabetes. The organization has a weak matrix structure, where al of your team members report to different functional managers and none of the team member report to you directly. Your project has extremely high visibility in the company, and there is a lot of pressure on you to deliver on time and within budget. However, you are concerned whether you will have the necessary authority and power to complete the project deliverables. Which of the following types of powers will be MOST effective in your situation?
Which of the following tool / technique are of develop project team process EXCEPT:
You are the project manager of a company that is building ATM software for a large bank and financial institutions. You have been told that the ATM software must meet very stringent quality standards. Including rigorous auditing of all transactions, ability to recover in case of software/ hardware errors, and fraud detection/analysis and robust two-factor authentication. The ATM system has been shipped to several large banks and customers. However, one of your customers is complaining that your ATM system does not adequately perform two-factor authentication. In fact, there is a potential vulnerability in the software that would allow a sophisticated attacker to withdraw money from other people's account. In light of these issues, your company has decided to recall all the ATM systems, and perform a hardware/ software upgrade. Which of the following best describes these costs associated with your project?
Which of the following BEST describes a mutually binding legal agreement that obligates the seller to provide specified products / services and obligates the buyer to pay the seller?
Which of the following statements are true regarding proposals EXCEPT:
All of the following statements are true regarding the request seller responses process EXCEPT:
Which of the following tools/ technique of the quality planning process can be used to identify the project variables that will have the greatest impact on overall project outcomes and results?
You are the project manager for a company that sells online music. The company is growing so well that the company has outgrown its I.T infrastructure. In fact, the company's current infrastructure is unable to handle the terabytes of music download each day. As a result, the company has decided to outsource its music download infrastructure to a third party content management vendor. The content management vendor will host the compressed music files across its geographically distributed web server farms, and handle all the logistics with music file downloads and data streaming. On your qualified sellers list, you have identified one potential vendor MusikCM. Your procurement department is conducting an independent estimate of costs of the proposals in order to compare the vendor prices. However, your procurement department has identified a large difference between the independent estimate and the proposed vendor cost. Which of the following statements are FALSE?
You are in the process of making information available to project stakeholders in a timely manner. All of the following statements are true EXCEPT:
The project management executing processes include all of the following EXCEPT:
Which of the following process is involved with collecting and disseminating performance information?
You are in the process of directing the performance of the planned project activities and managing the various technical and organizational interfaces that exist within your project. Which of the following process are you performing?
You are the project manager at a financial services company. Your company has awarded a CPFF (cost plus fixed fee) contract to XYZ Corp, a financial consulting company, to develop a comprehensive workstation offering real-time advanced charting, decision support tools, and portfolio management. The terms and conditions of the contract explicitly stipulate that XY Corp must provide weekly status reports and performance reports regarding the project work. However, the seller has failed to provide any status report for the past 3 weeks. Which of the following is the BEST action to take?
Which of the following statements are FALSE regarding weighting and screening systems?
Which of the following statements are FALSE regarding Bidder conferences?
Reasons for changing the staffing management plan include all of the following EXCEPT:
Which of the following are outputs of the information distribution process EXCEPT:
Which of the following describes an input to the direct and manage project execution process that consists of documented, authorized directions required to bring expected future project performance into conformance with project plan?
Which of the following are outputs of the develop project team process?
You are in the process of directing the performance of the planned project activities and managing the various technical and organizational interfaces that exist within your project. All of the following are outputs of this process EXCEPT:
Which of the following are false regarding corrective actions?
You are a project manager at a project company developing wireless mobile applications. You are currently in the risk identification process, where you are trying to identify and document all risk that might impact the project. You have assembled your experts both from inside and outside the company. You have asked them to make a anonymous questionnaire to identify the potential risks of the project. The experts will then mail back the questionnaire directly to you. Once you have received the feedback, you intend to organize the responses in order to compile a final list of potential project risks. Which of the following best describes the techniques are you using?
Which of the following depicts a hierarchical tabulation of physical assemblies, subassemblies and components required to manufacture a product?
You are in the process of defining the specific activities that need to be performed to develop the necessary project deliverables. Which of the following are NOT outputs that you will produce during this process?
You are in the process of establishing a total cost baseline for measuring project performance. Which of the following is the LEAST helpful INPUT?
Which f the following processes involves determining and documenting which risks are likely to affect the project?
You are currently the project manager at a rapidly growing retailer of high-performance audio equipment. You have been asked to lead the project to expand the retail business in the Unite States. You are currently deciding amongst three promising geographic locations: New York, Seattle, and San Francisco. You have been asked that San Francisco has a smaller market potential, but the probabilities of success is high. On the other hand, the New York market has larger market potential, but the probability of success is low. Your project team member has given you the following forecast. Which of the following statements are true?
Schedule model data, which is an output of the schedule development process, includes all of the following EXCEPT:
Which of the following statements are FALSE regarding project scope management plan?
All of the following precedence relationships can be expressed using PDM EXCEPT:
You are in the process project a project schedule for repainted your house, you first need to scrap off the existing paint, and then add a layer of primer. The primer provides the paint a better bonding surface so it sticks to the base material much better. Without priming, drywall surfaces will soak up more finish paint in some areas than in others, producing a splotchy effect. Unfortunately, you have to wait once the primer is applied you must wait until the primer dries before adding on the actual paint. You estimate that it will take 8 hours for the primary to dry. To correctly sequence these activities, which of the following should you do?
Which of the following describes the difference between the maximum funding and the end of cost baseline?
A poorly written detailed Project Scope Statement will impact all of the following EXCEPT:
All of the following are he benefits of using WBS except:
You are a project manager at an utility company. Due to the recent rise in the cost of petroleum, the market demand for cheaper alternate forms of energy has grown exponentially. Your company has identified a multi billion dollar market opportunity for alternate forms of energy. However your organization does not have enough resources and expertise to exploit this market opportunity. Hence your organization has identified and hire a team of scientists. Your organization is working with recruiting firm to identify the qualified candidates. Which of the following best describes the type of strategy you are using to deal with this market opportunity?
You would like to develop a cost estimates for your project. However you are under tremendous time pressure, and do not have a time to perform extensive cost calculations. You just need to determine a quick, ball park estimates for your project. Which of the following cost estimating techniques should you use?
You are using the three points estimating techniques to estimate the duration of the scheduled activities. Which of the following statements are true given the following data? Pessimistic=200 days Optimistic days=100 days Most likely=120 days Average=140 days Variance=466.66
You are the project manager for the software company that develops stock analysis software. You have been assigned to develop a new technical analysis tools to forecast the price of stock given its historical volatility based on Elliot Wave techniques. You need to gather necessary information to write the project scope management plan. Which of the following information do you not need as input to your current process?
Which of the following statements are true regarding the critical path method?
Which of the following describes the longest path through a project schedule network after resource leveling?
You are the project manger at a leading manufacturer of consumer electronics, personal computers and peripherals. Unfortunately, your company is facing a rapidly maturing market characterized by consolidation and commoditization. Hence you have been assigned a project to drive growth and profit by integrating an online CRM (costumer relationship management) solution. Industry benchmarks suggest the CRM solution should generate $100-$300M in bottom the benefits. You have just finished developing the risk response plan for the project. Which of the following is the BEST action to perform next?
All of the following statements are true regarding simulation and Monte Carlo analysis EXCEPT:
Which of the following statements are FALSE regarding expected monetary value analysis (EMV)?
You are in the process of identifying and documenting the project roles and responsibilities and create staffing management plan. All of the following should be addressed when listing the roles and responsibilities EXCEPT:
A summary activity describes a group of related schedule activities aggregated at some summary level, and displayed/ reported as a single activity at the summary level. What is another term for a summary activity?
Which of the following best describes the amount of time one can delay the start of task without delaying the completion of the project?
With respect to management planning, timing defines how often risk management process should be performed throughout the project lifecycle. Which of the following is the key factor affects timing?
You are the project manager at a software company developing the next-gen OODBMS (Object Oriented Data Base Management System). You are in the process of developing project schedule using CPM (Critical Path Method). One of the disadvantages of CPM is that it does NOT consider resource availability. In fact, you've quickly identified that one of your key engineers, Michael, is over allocated. Which of the following statements are true?
Which of the following statements are FALSE regarding analogous estimating techniques?
Reserve analysis is a tool/ technique in all of the following processes EXCEPT:
All of the following should be included in the initial staffing management plan as part of human resource planning EXCEPT:
You are a project manager at day-old donuts, a rapidly growing franchise selling premium donuts at a discount. Currently your company is planning for opening new stores throughout the United States. You have been asked to open a store in Manhattan, New York. Construction on a new store is about to begin. You have determined the dependencies between activities on a project. One of the activity dependencies is that the trusses on the building must be installed prior to the installation of the roofing. Which of the following is true?
Probability-impact matrix, risk data quality assessment, risk categorization, and risk urgency assessment are tool/ techniques of which process?
You have been recently assigned to provide an accurate project schedule for a large construction company. You are evaluating the network diagrams for the construction project, and are using backward pass calculations to construct the schedule. You are trying to calculate the latest start time for laying the foundation of building. The expected duration for this task is 120 days. The task must be completed within 300 days, while the expected completion is between 220 days. The latest finish date is 290 days. Based on this information, what is the latest start time of this task?
You are in the process of developing an approved project schedule that will serve baseline against which the project can be tracked. All of the following can be following are required as part of schedule development EXCEPT:
Which of the following statements most accurately describes the difference between plan purchases and acquisitions and plan contracting?
Poor allocation of time and resources and inadequate quality of the project plan should be classified in which of the following risk categories?
All of the following situations will cause schedule activity duration estimates to directly influence the cost estimates ESCEPT:
Which of the following statements are FALSE regarding the activity duration estimating process?
Which of the following process is used to identify project roles, responsibilities, and reporting relationships for project team member?
All of the following statements are true regarding the procurement management plan EXCEPT:
You are currently in the process of prioritizing risks by their impact and probability of occurrence. The risk register updates from this process include all of the following EXCEPT:
A WBS is an input to all of the processes EXCEPT:
All of the following statements are true regarding cost-reimbursable contracts EXCEPT:
Which of the following statements are FALSE regarding the CPM method?
You've been hired as a project manager for a local community college. The community college wants you upgrade the hardware for each of its web servers, and install the necessary security patches for each webserver. You are ready to begin the activity resource estimation process for your project. Which of the following would you NOT consider when developing the activity resource requirements document?
Which of the following statements regarding risk register is FALSE?
Which of the statements regarding the WBS is FALSE?
Which of the following describes a hierarchically organized representation of identified project risks arranged by risk categories?
Activity attributes identify multiple attributes associated with each schedule activity is an output of the activity definition process. All of the following are considered activity attributes EXCEPT:
One of your friends is a project manager at a computer security company. She is currently managing a project for the development of a NAC (network admissions control) appliance that uses the network infrastructure to enforce security policy compliance on all devices seeking to access network computing resources, thereby limiting damage from emerging security threats. Her project team has just completed the initial project budget identifies the communications requirements, and defined the work packages. Which of the following would you recommend as the NEXT BEST action to perform?
You are in the process of defining how to plan and execute the risk management activities for your project. Which of the following statements are FALSE?
Which of the following statements is MOST true regarding Activity A, considering the following table?
Subnetwork are a term used in reference with which of the following?
You are taking over a project from another project manger during the project planning process. You've identified that your project team has already created the WBS, developed estimates for work packages, and sequenced the project activities using the arrow diagramming method. In addition, your team has applied schedule network analysis techniques to create the project schedule. Which action should be performed NEXT?
Which of the following are not used to create the scope baseline for a project?
The risk management plan is a subset of the project management plan and describes how risk management should be performed. All of the following should be included in the risk management plan EXCEPT:
You are a project manager for a company that publishes children books. Five years ago, your company purchased a sophisticated printing press capable of high-volume production. The company originally purchased the printing press for $500,000. However, printing press's current book value is $200,000. The $200,000 book value is best considered a:
You are currently on a 3-week vocation in Australia. You've decided to rent a car as your means of transport around the country. Driving in a foreign country can be potentially a risky activity as you are unfamiliar with the terrain. Hence, the probability of being involved in an accident is higher. You are very concerned with regards to the financial liability incurred if you were involved in an accident. As a project manager, you are aware of various techniques used to respond to understand risks. You would like to apply your risk management knowledge to reduce the risks associated with your driving. Which of the following is the BEST example of risk transference?
With respect to risk management planning, timing defines how often risk management processes should be performed throughout the project lifecycle. Which of the following is the key factor affecting timings?
Qualitative risk analysis requires accurate data as its input. Risk data quality assessment ranking is a technique to evaluate the degree to which the data regarding risks would be careful. Risk quality data assessment involves examining all of the following EXCEPT:
Which of the following is the MOST likely candidate for a three-point estimate?
Which of the following are not tools/ techniques of the activity definition process?
You are in the process of numerically analyzing the effects of identified risks. Which of the following is the LEAST helpful input?
You are the project manger at a software company developing the next-gen web application server. As software development can be very chaotic, your company has elected to follow the more rigorous approach to software development. Specifically, your company has chosen to adopt the Rational Unified Process (RUP) for your current software project. The RUP methodology is highly iterative and produces numerous deliverables include UML diagrams, architecture diagrams, prototypes, and test-cases. You have just produced your activity duration estimates and updated your activity attributes. Which process have you just finished?
All of the following are constraints that can limit flexibility in human resource planning EXCEPT:
Which of the following statements is true regarding PDM (precedence diagramming techniques)?
The Preliminary Scope Statement which is and output of the Develop Preliminary Project Scope Statement process, is an input to all of the following EXCEPT:
Dennis works for an international manufacturer for consumer electronics. He has been recently assigned to supervise and manage the manufacturing of a new model of flat-screen televisions. His supervisor congratulates Dennis on his expanded responsibilities. He informs Dennis that his new assignment will have the 1000 units of the new flat screen manufactured by September. Before Dennis begins manufacturing these new units he needs to determine the characteristics of his new product line, such as screen size, color, resolution e.t.c. which of the following tasks must Dennis perform prior to manufacturing the product?
In which of the following project management process group can stakeholders be identified?
According to the PMI, which of the following best describes the differences between programs and projects?
Which of the following best determines the amount of authority a project manager will have during a project?
You are the project manager for an information technology division of a large financial services firm in the United States. Your company offers a web based trading platform that provides options and futures trading for U.S commodities markets. Due to the rise in popularity of futures and options trading, your company has grown rapidly. To keep up with the demands you have been assigned with the responsibility of upgrading company's network and computing infrastructure. You planned to purchase a new high-end mainframe server. The new server will cost $150,000 and can be used for 10 years. After 2 years the resale value of mainframes will be $100,000. After 5 years the resale value of server will be $75,000. After 7 years the resale value of server will be $30,000. After 10 years, the server will be obsolete. What is the annual depreciation expense for this server if you use straight-line depreciation?
You are the project manager at Happy Coffee Cafe, a rapidly growing franchise selling premium blended coffee. Currently your company is planning on opening additional stores throughout Europe. Your company is evaluating different areas of expansion, including, France, Germany and England. You intend to use NPV (net present value) analysis to evaluate which area provides the base opportunity for expansion. Which of the following statements are true regarding NPV calculations?
You are a project manager at a historic Shoppe, a rapidly growing bookstore selling hard to find books and periodicals. Currently your company is planning on opening additional stores throughout the United States. Your primary market includes densely populated, major metropolitan cities. Your company is deciding among New York, Los Angeles, and Seattle. Based on data which project should be recommended using the discounted cash flow technique? Project New York makes $100,000 in 2 years Project Los Angeles makes $110,000 in 3 years Project Seattle makes $120,000 in 4 years Assume that the cost of capital is 8%
You are the project manager at information technology division of a large health care provider in the United States. Due to the new regulatory requirements enacted by HIPAA to ensure the privacy of confidential medical records, you have been assigned to audit all I.T. system to ensure compliance. You need to ensure that all the data in database is encrypted to ensure confidentially. You need to ensure that all the users are properly authenticated and authorization to confidential information follows the least privilege principle. The deadline to ensure the compliance with HIPAA regulations is within 120 days. Failing to complete the project in 120 days will result fine to your organization. You have been given a budget of $500,000 dollars. Due to the overall budget cuts this year, you have been told that the budget is $500,000 and cannot exceed from this. Which are the primary constraints for the project?
You are a part of project software team responsible for developing a new CRM software application. The project has been ongoing for the past several months. A few members of the project team are currently discussing introducing a significant change to one of the major work packages. After discussions you received a message from the vice president of engineering informing you of the project changes, and are asked to complete the necessary paperwork in order to process the change. This is an example of:
According to PMI, application areas are categories of projects that have been common elements in the majority of projects, but are not necessarily required or applicable to all projects. Application areas are not usually defined in terms of:
Your company manufactures memory chips for workstation computer. Your project involves manufacturing a very high capacity memory chip. 128GB. You have worked on he same project two year ago to manufacture low capacity memory chip.2GB. You are in the DEVELOP THE PROJECT CHARTER process. Which of the following inputs is least helpful?
You are the project manager fro the large children's toy manufacturer. You have been asked to manufacture the latest craze in "Dancing Widgets" for upcoming Christmas season. You've been informed that the company needs at least one month lead time in order to have Widgets on retailer's shelves for Christmas season. Hence, based on the current sales forecast you've been asked to deliver 100,000 units by November 1st at the least. Since the toys will be used by young children, the "Dancing Widgets" must be manufactured to meet very specific safety specifications. Your company drives 90% of if its revenue from sales generated during the Christmas holiday season. As a result, you have been given a budget of $15 million dollars to complete this project. Which of the following is the primary constraint for this project?
You've been hired as manager to design and construct a new casino in Las Vegas, over the next 18 months. Given the size of the project and the abbreviated time frame, you are attempting to identify ways to reduce the timeframes for many of various tasks. You've developed the WBS and created a Gantt chart using specialized scheduling software. After analyzing the data, you've discovered several opportunities where tasks and phases may be overlapped in order to save time. This is an example of:
Your company manufactures memory chips for workstation computers. Your current project involves manufacturing a very high capacity memory chip (128GB). You worked on the same project three years ago to manufacture a lower capacity memory chip (2GB). You've received a project charter from your supervisor. Which of the following statements are FALSE?
During which phase of the project lifecycle is the level of risk and uncertainty is highest?
Which of the following are not inputs to the develop preliminary project scope statement?
You are the Chief Technology Officer of a major stock exchange. You have just completed the WBS, and WBS dictionary with respects to reengineer the organization's back office accounting, billing, and administrative systems. Which of the following is the BEST NEXT plan of action?
The project charter, either directly, or by reference to other documents, should address all of the following EXCEPT:
Projects are typically authorized as a result of one or more of the following needs:
Which of the following statements are TRUE regarding comparative methods, scoring method, and cash flow analysis?
You are the project manager within an information technology department of a retailer. In order to allow for better real-tracking, in inventory control, and supply chain management, your company in financing a project a project to install and deploy RFID on all items of merchandise. As the project manager you're in select sellers process, and have 4 different vendors on your qualified sellers list. One of the vendors on your list has invited you to lunch. What should you do?
Which of the following is used to maintain an index of contract documents and correspondence, and assist with retrieving and archiving contracts documentation?
Which of the following are tools to contract closure process?
You are a project manager at a large accounting firm in United States. Throughout the year your firm provides both consulting services and accounting services to XYZ widgets, inc, a publicity traded company listed on a New York stock exchange. Currently your project involves auditing and financial statements to XYZ widgets, in the preparation of annual shareholders meeting. Your team has just completed the financial auditing of the firm, and recently published its finding. You have performed this project under contact and are in the contract closure process. Which of the following should you document as a part of contract closure process?
Which of the following project management areas contains the manage stakeholders process?
Which of the following are inputs to the close project process except:
Which of the following best describes the complete set of indexed contract documentation, including the closed contract, for inclusion with the final project file?
Which of the following are not considered as enterprise environmental factor?
You have been hired as a project manger for a local community college. The community college wants you to design and develop a custom student registration web site, so that student can select and register for their classes online. Your project is nearly complete. However near the end of the project your team experienced some technical difficulties that caused cost overrun and schedule delays. This information may be useful in future projects in all of the following activities except:
According to the PMI which of the following is considered as a special case of contract closure?
Earned value analysis is performance reporting tools used in manage stakeholder process. Which of the following measurement should be used as a performance measurement baseline?
Which of the following statements are true regarding project ending?
You r the project manager at a large accounting firm in the United States. Throughout the year your firms provides both the consulting services and accounting/auditing services to XYZ Widgets, Inc, a publicity traded company listed on a New York stock exchange. Currently your project involves auditing and financial statements to XYZ widgets, in the preparation of annual shareholders meeting. While your team is in the midst of project execution, you are informed that your project is cancelled due to new SEC regulations. Specially a new SEC rule prohibits accounting firm from providing both auditing services and consulting services to the client, due to the potential conflicts of interest that could rise from such business relationship. As a result your project is cancelled and budget for your project is cut. For necessary budget your project team is banned and your project members go their separate ways. Which of the following types of project ending is this considered?
Which of the following establishes the procedure to perform product verification, update contract records to reflect final results and archive information for future use?
Which of the following statements are false regarding contract closure procedure?
You are the project manager at a large automaker in Japan. Your project involves designing the next generation 4-wheel drive Sport Utility vehicle for the Asian market. A new fuel efficient engine design is required as part of your project. Unfortunately, your project team did not have the necessary expertise to design and manufacture a new fuel-efficient engine. Hence, your company plans has decided to subcontract all the engine designs an outside manufacturer in Europe. During your initial visits to European partners, you were presented with an expensive gift. You were told that this is local custom to give such gifts to business partners to during their visits. What should you do?
You are the project manager within and information technology department of a large retailer. You are responsible for updating the network infrastructure of the company. As a project manager, you are in the Select Sellers process, and have four different vendors on your qualified sellers list. One of the vendors on your list has invited you to lunch to a very highclass and expensive restaurant. In fact, a meal can cost anywhere from $500-$1000 USD. What should you do?
Michael works as a project manager at a construction company developing a new 150 story sky-scraper. He has asked a couple of his team members to return to warehouse to pick additional supplies. Since one of his team members is an expert electrician and since warehouse is close to where the Michael lives, he has asked his team mates to also stop by his house to fix some very minor electrical problems in his house. Is Michael behavior violating the PMI code of ethics?
You are the project manager within an information technology department of a large retailer In order to allow for better real-tracking, in inventory control, and supply chain management, in inventory control, and supply chain management, your company in financing a project to install and to install and deploy RFID on all items of merchandise. As the project manager, you've just completed the select sellers' process, and selected 5 different vendors on your qualified sellers list who has responded to your company's RFP. One of the vendors remaining the qualified sellers list is RFID-PM Inc. although you have no financial interest in this company, one of yours old high school buddies, Terence, sits on the board of directors of this company. Is there a conflict of interest in this situation?
You have determined that a design error will interface with meeting technical performance objectives. Which of the following is the preferred response in this situation?
Which of the following tool/ technique are unplanned responses to risks that were previously unidentified?
Which of the following statements are true regrinding issue logs?
The Monitor and Control Project Work process is performed to monitor project processes and performance. Which of the following are you LEAST concerned with during this process?
Which of the following are not tools/ techniques of Manage Stakeholders process?
Your friend is a project manager at a real estate company that develops and manages commercial, retail and residential properties in United States and Europe. As a company continues to grow, the company's IT infrastructure is unable to meet business needs of organization. Hence she has been assigned to upgrade the company's IT infrastructure. Specifically, her team has been asked to implement a corporate general ledger system, improve accounting and real estate processes, develop a lease tracking system, and implement HR and payroll systems and perform diagnostics and monthly closures. Her project team has already completed all the initiating / project planning activities and received sign-off/ approvals on the project charter, project scope, and detailed work packages. Your project team is in the process of completing all the work packages. However, she has just received a change request to add additional reporting functionality to the project deliverables. She calls a meeting of her project team to determine how to proceed with the change. This is an example of which of the following?
Which of the following forecasts the most likely total project costs based on the current project performance to date?
Which of the following statements are TRUE regarding the scope verification statement?
All of the following are sources of conflict EXCEPT:
You have been assigned to a project to build a large 30-story condominium in Las Vegas. The condominium will feature luxurious amenities like state of the art work-out facilities, conference centers, valet services, maid services, spas, gourmet dining and resort style pools. You've calculated the estimated project completion date. However, the estimated completion date is 2 months after the desired completion date. After analyzing the project network diagram, you've determined that many of the activities have discretionary dependencies. To decrease the project duration, you've requested additional resources but were told that NO additional resources are available for your project. Assuming that the project has low risks, which of the following is the BEST plan of action?
You are in the process of controlling changes to the project schedule. All of the following are outputs of this process EXCEPT:
You would like to measure the association between tow variables. Which of the following is NOT a measuring technique or measure you would use to do this?
Which of the following best describes residual risks?
You are the project manager in the I.T department of the local university. Your current project involves developing a web-based interface for legacy student registration application. Your current project has recently experienced a change where you have been asked to support an additional data base system, instead of current database system in use. As a result, many of the greed upon WBS elements were modified. Which type of change has occurred within your project?
To ensure the effectiveness of corrective actions, corrective actions frequently require which of the following?
Which of the following statements are true regarding the Pareto diagrams?
Which of the following are true regarding the critical path EXCEPT:
Which of the following statements are FALSE regarding Project Time Management?
Which of the following statements are TRUE:
You are project manager responsible for constructing a new sports arena for the upcoming Olympics. Construction began on a project over a year ago. The stakeholders of the project want a status report on the performance of the project to date. You've obtained the following measurements: BAC=500, ETC=200, PV=500, AC=200, EV=300, CPI=1.5 Based on the measurements above, which of the following statements are TRUE?
Which of the following statements are FALSE regarding quality audits?
Project cost control includes all of the following EXCECPT:
Which of the following statements best describes the responsibility of the Change Control Board (CCB)?
You are a project manager for a company that sells online music. Your project is to develop new content management system that will not only manage all users purchases and downloads but will automatically learn the users music interest to make future product recommendation. In addition your content management system must scale to support millions of current music downloads a day. Your team has made a significant progress on the project. You are preparing the performance of the project to date and have calculated the following measurement: PV=4000, EV=3500, AC=3000 What is the CPI of the project?
The Estimate At Completion (EAC) can be used to forecast the most likely total project cost based upon the current project performance. Which of the following formulas cannot be used to calculate the EAC when current project variances are NOT typical and such variances NOT expected to continue?
Which of the following techniques may NOT be used to a project to resolve conflicts?
All of the following are part of scope baseline EXCEPT:
Which of the following statements are TRUE?
Which of the following best describes a win-lose conflict resolution technique that uses formal power to command/ demand a specific solution to a problem?
Which of the following is the configuration management activity that is involved with capturing, storing, and accessing configuration information needed to mange products?
Keeping up with the growth was becoming a problem for a privately owned Chinese financial services company. Although it easily lured business from state-owned competitors, low skill levels and weak accounting systems threaten the company's cash flow. Moreover, poorly invested assets were delivering inadequate returns. Hence, you have been assigned over an existing project to upgrade the IT system to allow for an expansion. Specifically, the IT upgrade will enable the company to serve more competitors, expand the product line, gain market share, and win more licenses. You've determined the following information so far: Activity X has an early start of day3, early finish of day6, and a late finish of day10. Activity Y is being performed by resource that had been very difficult to obtain. The CPI of the project is 1.2 and the SPI is 0.9. Based on the information above, which of the following areas should cause the MOST concern?
Integrated change control includes the following activities EXCEPT:
Which of the following statements are FALSE regarding configuration management?
All of the following statements regarding quality metrics are true EXCEPT:
You are presented the following schedule data regarding various project activities on a critical path: You are told that the project has negative float of 4 months. What is the minimum amount it will cost to save four months by crashing the project?
Which of the following defines, the procedures by which the cost baseline may be change, including the paperwork, tracking systems, an approval levels for authorizing changes?
Your project is nearing completion when a previously undocumented risk is identified. The risk could negatively affect the outcome of the project. Which of the following is the BEST action to perform next?
Which of the following statements are FALSE regarding the cost change control system?
You are in the process of controlling changes to the project scope. All of the following are tools/ techniques you can use EXCET:
Which of the following processes involves ensuring that risk plans are properly executed?
All of the following statements are true regarding the configuration control board (CCB) EXCEPT:
You are the project manager at a large investment bank. Your current project involves developing a creative financing solution for a large bio-tech company in order to facilitate the acquisition of another company. Specifically, your project involves issuing convertible debt securities in order to access a new pool of low-cost capital. This transaction is the largest ever convertible transaction in the bio-tech company. Unfortunately, your project is plagued by frequent changes to project charter. Who should be primary person responsible for deciding whether the changes to the project charter are necessary?
All of the following are outputs of the Risk Monitoring and Control process EXCEPT:
With respects to the cost of quality, which of the following individuals was responsible for developing the "zero-defects" approach?
Which of the following tools/ techniques of the quality planning process compares previous similar activities from a prior project to the current project activities to develop performance measurement standards?
Which of the following statements are true regarding collocation?
Which of the following statements are true regarding Quality Planning and Perform Quality Assurance?
Which of the following statements are true regarding the Expectancy theory?
You are in the process of making information available to project stakeholders in a timely manner. Which of the following statements are true?
Which of the following statements are FALSE regarding contracts?
You are in the process of directing the performance of the planned project activities and managing the various technical and organizational interfaces that exist within your project. All of the following actions that you should perform in this stage EXCEPT:
Consider the Project Integration Management knowledge area. Which of the following process are NOT included?
You are the project manager for the manufacturer of children's toys. Your project team is in the process of designing a new toy for children for next year's Christmas season. Your 5-members are working together for past six months and has become a complete self-directed team with little, if any management supervision required. All five members are in constant communication with each other. How many lines of communications are their in your project team?
All of the following are tools/ techniques of the develop project team process EXCEPT:
Which of the following statements are true regarding Delphi technique?
Negotiation, preassignment, and acquisition are tools and techniques of which of the following processes?
You are the project manager responsible for renovating a 70-year old building. You intend to hire an outside construction firm to seismic retrofit the building in order to make sure that the building can withstand the large earthquakes. The outside construction firm has requested SOW. Which of the following statements are FALSE regarding the contract SOW?
You have just completed the project planning process group and you are ready to begin the project executing process group. You'll need to perform all of the following EXCEPT:
You are the project manger at a leading manufacturer of consumer electronics, personal computers and peripherals. Unfortunately, your company is facing a rapidly maturing market characterized by consolidation and commoditization. Hence you have been assigned a project to drive growth and profit by integrating an online CRM (costumer relationship management) solution. Industry benchmarks suggest the CRM solution should generate $100-$300M in bottom the benefits. As the project comes to an end, you've determined that the CPI is 1.2 and SPI is 1.1. In addition, you've determined that the project team has added six reporting capabilities and functionalities that were overlooked in the project management plan. Upper management is very satisfied with the results of your project. Which of the following BEST describes the project's success?
Which of the following best describes the Achievement Theory of motivation?
In which of the following process is the qualified sellers list developed?
Which of the following describes an input to the direct and manage project execution process that consists of documented, authorized directions that reduce the probability of consequences associated with project risks?
You are in the process of obtaining the necessary human resources to complete the project. Which of the following are NOT outputs of this process?
You are a project manager for the manufacture of children's toys. Your project team is in the process of designing a new children toy for New Year Christmas season. With the rapidly approaching deadline, your team members are frequently arguing with each other. However, recently your team has just begun to work well together. There appears to be a sense of team cohesion and friendliness. Your team members are able to express criticisms constructively, and able to work out their differences. Which of the following stages of develop project team best describes your team?
You have just completed the project planning process group, and you are ready to begin the project executing process group. You'll need to perform all of the following executing processes EXCEPT:
Which of the following are TRUE regarding Bidder conferences?
You have been recently hired to be a project manager at a bio-tech company to develop treatment for diabetes. George is the voice president of R&D. he tell you that your project is over budget and that you need to reduce salary expenses by $500K. Which type of power is George yielding in order to influence your decisions?
All of the following statements regarding Bidder conferences are TRUE EXCEPT:
You are the project manger at a biotech company, where you are leading a cross-functional team to develop a treatment for diabetes. The organization has a weak matrix structure, where all of your project team members report to different functional managers and none of the team member report to you directly. Your project has extremely high visibility in the company, and there is a lot of pressure on you to deliver on time and within budget. However, you are quiet new to the company joining company just 3 weeks before. Hence you are concerned whether you'll have necessary authority and power to complete the project deliverables. Which of the following types of powers will be MOST effective in your situation?
You are in the process of reviewing offers and choosing among potential sellers. All of the following are tools/ techniques you can use in this process EXCEPT:
Which of the following statements are NOT true regarding corrective actions?
Evaluation criteria are an input to the Select Sellers process. Which of the following is LEAST likely an example of an evaluation criteria?
Proposals are seller prepared documents that describe the seller's ability to provide requested services. Which of the following processes is used to elicit the proposal?
Which of the following statements are false regarding the Close Project process?
You are in the process of completing and selling each contract, and resolving any open items. All of the following are inputs you require EXCEPT:
You are the project manager at a large accounting firm in the United States. Throughout the year your firm provides both consulting services and accounting/ auditing services to XYZ Widgets, Inc, a publicly traded company listed on the New York Stock Exchange. Currently, your project involves auditing the financial statements of XYZ Widgets Inc, in preparation for the annual shareholders/ investors meeting. Your team has just completed the financial auditing of the firm, and recently published its findings. With this project completed, you have just been given your next project assignment. Which of the following statements are true?
You are currently in the closing process and are involved in the product verification. Which of the following best describes the purpose of product verification?
In which process is formal acceptance and handover of the final product/ service performed?
Product verification is usually performed in the closing process. Which of the following best describes its purpose?
Which of the following establishes the formal documentation as to why the project was terminated and formalizes the procedures for transferring the unfinished delivers of the cancelled project?
Earned value analysis is a performance reporting tool/ technique used in the Manage Stakeholders process. Which of the following performance measurements is derived by the following formula: (EV/PV)?
Which of the following best describes the project integration Management Knowledge Area?
According to the PMI, early termination of a contract is considered a special case of:
Which of the following statements are false regarding the records management system?
Which of the following process is involved with the completion and settlement of the contract?
Contract documentation are an input to the contract closure process. Which of the following are NOT included as part of the contract documentation?
Which of the following is NOT considered an organizational process asset?
The purpose of lessons learned documentation, that is an output of the contract closure process, is all of the following EXCEPT:
Which of the following are not tools/techniques of the develop project charter process?
You are a project manager at for an information technology division of a large financial brokerage in the United States. Due to new regulatory requirements enacted by Sarbanes-Oxley you have been assigned to audit all I.T. systems to ensure compliance. You need to ensure that all data in the data base in encrypted to ensure confidentially. You need to ensure that all users are properly authenticated. You also need to verify that authorization to confidential financial information follows the least-privilege principle. The deadline to ensure compliance with Sarbanes-Oxley regulations is within 180 days. Failing to complete the result in 180 days will result in the significant fines to your organization. You have been given a budget of $2 million dollars. Due to the overall budget cuts this year, you have been told that budget is fixed and cannot be increased by $1000 dollars. Which is the primary constraint for this project?
Which of the following statements are not true?
Your company develops large commercial and industry real estate. In you current project, you have been asked to manage the construction of a 30-story office building. Which document describes the business needs for this project, identifies key deliverables, and gives you authority to begin the project and start assigning resources?
Dennis works for an international manufacturer of consumer electronics. He has been recently assigned to supervise and manage the manufacturing of a new model of flat-screen televisions. His supervisor congratulates Dennis on his expanded responsibilities. He informs Dennis that his new assignment will have the 1000 units of the new flat screen manufactured by September. What of the following is true regarding Dennis's new assignment?
According to PMI, application areas are categories of projects that have common elements in the majority of project, but are NOT necessarily required or applicable to all projects. Application areas are NOT usually defined in terms of:
Your company manufactures CPU for high-end workstation computers. Your current project involves manufacturing a very high speed CPU (~10GHZ). You worked on a similar project three years ago to manufacture a lower speed CPU (~2GHZ). You are in the develop project charter process. Which of the following inputs are LEAST helpful?
You are the project manager at Happy Coffee Cafe, a rapidly growing franchise selling premium blended coffee. Currently, your company is planning on opening additional stores through the United states. Your target markets primarily include densely populated metropolitan areas. Your company is evaluating different areas for expansion, including New York, San Francisco, and Seattle. Based on your market analysis you have obtained the following information: New York-IRR (45%), payback period (1.5 years) San Francisco-IRR (32%), payback period (1.1 years) Seattle-IRR (36%), payback period (0.75 years) Based on this data which area is best for Happy Coffee Cafe?
According to the PMI, which of the following are NOT true with regards to programs and projects?
You are the project manager at Day-Old donuts a rapidly growing franchise selling premium donuts at a discount. Currently, your company is planning on opening additional stores throughout Europe. Your company is evaluating different areas for expansion including France, Germany and England. You need to give the presentation to the steering committee to discuss which areas provide the best opportunities for expansion. For each of the three locations, you have been asked to determine the discount rate at which the present value of future cash flows of an investment equal to the cost of investment. What is this considered?
You are the project manager for an information technology division of a large financial services firm in the United States. Your company offers a web based trading platform that provides options and futures trading for U.S commodities markets. Due to the rise in popularity of futures and options trading, your company has grown rapidly. In fact, due to rapid growth, the company's I.T. infrastructure is unable to meet the growing demands. To keep up with the demands you have been assigned the responsibility of upgrading the company's network and company's infrastructure. You have been asked to calculate the payback period for the project that is to be completed in the next 24 months. The IRR of the project is 12% and the annual savings will be $2million. The total cost of project will be $6million dollars. The cost of capital used by the company during previous projects is 5%. What is the payback period for this project?
Subject matter experts are resources that can provide very valuable information to the project. In which scope-statement processes are subject matter experts first utilized?
Which of the following statements are true regarding the risk break down structure?
You are the project manager for the software company that develops stock analysis software. You have been assigned to develop a new technical analysis tools to forecast the price of stock given its historical volatility based on Elliot Wave techniques. You need to gather necessary information to write the project scope management plan. Which of the following tools/ techniques will NOT be useful for you in this process?
Fragment network area term used in reference with which of the following?
Schedule model data, which is an input of the schedule development process, includes all of the following EXCEPT:
What is the total slack for activity D, considering the following table?
Which of the following is the BEST candidate for a three-point estimate?
Which of the following is an estimating technique that uses a statistical relationship between historical data and other variables to calculate an estimate for activity parameters such as duration and cost?
You are in the process of developing an approximation of the costs of the resources needed to complete each schedule activity. All of the following are outputs of this process EXCEPT:
Which of the following statements are true regarding cost estimating techniques?
You are in the process project a project schedule for repainted your house, you first need to scrap off the existing paint, and then add a layer of primer. The primer provides the paint a better bonding surface so it sticks to the base material much better. Without priming, drywall surfaces will soak up more finish paint in some areas than in others, producing a splotchy effect. You decided to speed up the process by starting priming before all the scraping is finished. To correctly sequence these activities, which of the following should you do?
Which of the following statements are true regarding the scope baseline for a project?
You are currently on a 3-week vocation in Australia. You've decided to rent a car as your means of transport around the country. Driving in a foreign country can be potentially a risky activity as you are unfamiliar with the terrain. Hence, the probability of being involved in an accident is higher. As a project manager, you are aware of various techniques used to respond to understand risks. You would like to apply your risk management knowledge to reduce the risks associated with your driving. Which of the following is the BEST example of risk avoidance?
Qualitative risk analysis requires accurate data as its input. Risk data quality assessment ranking is a technique to evaluate the degree to which the data regarding risks would be useful. Risk quality data assessment involves examining all of the following EXCEPT:
Which of the following best describes a form of progressive elaboration planning where the work to be performed in the near time is planned in detail at a low level of WBS, while the work far in future is planned for WBS components that are relatively high level of the WBS?
Which of the following statements are FALSE regarding the critical chain method?
You are in the process of identifying and documenting the logical relationships among schedule activities. Which of the following are NOT tools/ techniques you can use in this process?
Which of the following statements are true regarding GERT?
You are in the process of establishing a total cost baseline for measuring project performance. Which of the following is the LEAST helpful tool/ technique?
What is the lowest level in a WBS called?
You are in the process of identifying and documenting project risks. Which of the following is the LEAST helpful tool/ technique?
You are in the process of estimating the type of and quantity of resources needed to complete individual schedule activities. All of the following are tools/ techniques you can use in this process EXCEPT:
All of the following are constraints that can limit flexibility in human Resource Planning EXCEPT:
You are the project manager responsible for renovating a 70-year old building. You intend to hire an outside construction firm to seismic retrofit the building in order to make sure that the building can withstand the large earthquakes. You are in process of selecting a contract type best suited for this project. You would like to select a contract type that transfers the risk onto the seller for any cost risks and no-performance issues. Which contract type should you choose?
You are in the process of defining the specific activities that need to be performed to develop the necessary project deliverables. Which of the following are NOT tools/ techniques that you can use in this process?
Which of the following best describes the process of identifying which project needs can be met by procuring products or service outside the project organization?
You are using the three-point estimating technique to estimate the duration of a schedule activity. You are given the following data: Pessimistic=200days Optimistic=100days Most likely=120 days Average= 130 days Variance= 277.7 Which of the following statements are true?
All of the following are outputs of the scope definition process EXCEPT:
