PMP Exam    (R)

Practice Test
and Study
Guide
Tenth Edition
Dr. Ginger Levin, PMP, PgMP
J. LeRoy Ward, PMP, PgMP, PfMP, CSM
PMP Exam
      (R)

Practice Test
 and Study
   Guide
  Tenth Edition
  ESI International Project Management Series
                             Series Editor
             J. LeRoy Ward, Executive Vice President
                 ESI International, Arlington, Virginia


     PMP(R) Exam Practice Test and Study Guide, Tenth Edition
     Ginger Levin and J. LeRoy Ward * 978-1-4987-5282-4 * 2015
 Agile Strategic Management: Techniques for Continuous Alignment
                          and Improvement
               Soren Lyngso * 978-1-4665-9607-8 * 2014
    PgMP(R) Exam: Practice Test and Study Guide, Fourth Edition
     Ginger Levin and J. LeRoy Ward * 978-1-4822-0135-2 * 2013
                      PgMP(R) Exam Challenge!
     Ginger Levin and J. LeRoy Ward * 978-1-4822-0208-3 * 2013
     PMP(R) Exam: Practice Test and Study Guide, Ninth Edition
              Ginger Levin * 978-1-4822-0224-3 * 2013
               PMP(R) Exam Challenge! Sixth Edition
     J. LeRoy Ward and Ginger Levin * 978-1-4665-9982-6 * 2013
        Determining Project Requirements, Second Edition:
           Mastering the BABOK(R) and the CBAP(R) Exam
            Hans Jonasson * 978-1-4398-9651-8 * 2012
    Team Planning for Project Managers and Business Analysts
              Gail Levitt * 978-1-4398-5543-0 * 2012
    Practical Project Management for Building and Construction
              Hans Ottosson * 978-1-4398-9655-6 * 2012
     Project Management Concepts, Methods, and Techniques
            Claude H. Maley * 978-1-4665-0288-8 * 2012
     Program Management Complexity: A Competency Model
                Ginger Levin and J. LeRoy Ward
                  978-1-4398-5111-1 * 2011
               Project Management for Healthcare
              David Shirley * 978-1-4398-1953-1 * 2011
                     Managing Web Projects
           Edward B. Farkas * 978-1-4398-0495-7 * 2009
            Project Management Recipes for Success
            Guy L. De Furia * 978-1-4200-7824-4 * 2008
           Building a Project Work Breakdown Structure:
   Visualizing Objectives, Deliverables, Activities, and Schedules
             Dennis P. Miller * 978-1-4200-6969-3 * 2008
          A Standard for Enterprise Project Management
          Michael S. Zambruski * 978-1-4200-7245-7 * 2008
The Complete Project Management Office Handbook, Second Edition
             Gerard M. Hill * 978-1-4200-4680-9 * 2007
 PMP Exam     (R)

 Practice Test
  and Study
    Guide
      Tenth Edition

     Dr. Ginger Levin, PMP, PgMP
J. LeRoy Ward, PMP, PgMP, PfMP, CSM
Parts of A Guide to the Project Management Body of Knowledge, 2013, are reprinted with permission of the Project Management Institute, Inc., Four
Campus

Boulevard, Newtown Square, Pennsylvania 19073-3299 U.S.A., a worldwide organization advancing the state of the art in project management.

"CAPM" is a certification mark of the Project Management Institute, Inc., which is registered in the United States and other nations.

"OPM3" is a trademark of the Project Management Institute, Inc., which is registered in the United States and other nations.

"PfMP" is a certification mark of the Project Management Institute, Inc., which is registered in the United States and other nations.

"PgMP" is a certification mark of the Project Management Institute, Inc., which is registered in the United States and other nations.

"PMBOK" is a trademark of the Project Management Institute, Inc., which is registered in the United States and other nations.

"PMI" is a service and trademark of the Project Management Institute, Inc., which is registered in the United States and other nations.

"PMP" is a certification mark of the Project Management Institute, Inc., which is registered in the United States and other nations.




CRC Press
Taylor & Francis Group
6000 Broken Sound Parkway NW, Suite 300
Boca Raton, FL 33487-2742
(c) 2016 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC
CRC Press is an imprint of Taylor & Francis Group, an Informa business

No claim to original U.S. Government works
Version Date: 20150810

International Standard Book Number-13: 978-1-4987-5283-1 (eBook - PDF)

This book contains information obtained from authentic and highly regarded sources. Reasonable efforts have been made to publish reliable data and
information, but the author and publisher cannot assume responsibility for the validity of all materials or the consequences of their use. The authors and
publishers have attempted to trace the copyright holders of all material reproduced in this publication and apologize to copyright holders if permission
to publish in this form has not been obtained. If any copyright material has not been acknowledged please write and let us know so we may rectify in any
future reprint.

Except as permitted under U.S. Copyright Law, no part of this book may be reprinted, reproduced, transmitted, or utilized in any form by any electronic,
mechanical, or other means, now known or hereafter invented, including photocopying, microfilming, and recording, or in any information storage or
retrieval system, without written permission from the publishers.

For permission to photocopy or use material electronically from this work, please access www.copyright.com (http://www.copyright.com/) or contact
the Copyright Clearance Center, Inc. (CCC), 222 Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA 01923, 978-750-8400. CCC is a not-for-profit organization that provides
licenses and registration for a variety of users. For organizations that have been granted a photocopy license by the CCC, a separate system of payment
has been arranged.

Trademark Notice: Product or corporate names may be trademarks or registered trademarks, and are used only for identification and explanation
without intent to infringe.
Visit the Taylor & Francis Web site at
http://www.taylorandfrancis.com
and the CRC Press Web site at
http://www.crcpress.com
Contents

Preface..................................................................................................... vii
Acknowledgements................................................................................... xi
Introduction...........................................................................................xiii
Authors.................................................................................................. xvii
Acronyms................................................................................................ xix
Project Integration Management......................................................................... 1
Project Scope Management................................................................................31
Project Time Management.................................................................................61
Project Cost Management..................................................................................93
Project Quality Management...........................................................................123
Project Human Resource Management............................................................153
Project Communications Management.............................................................185
Project Risk Management.................................................................................213
Project Procurement Management...................................................................245
Project Stakeholder Management.....................................................................271
An Overview of the Domains...........................................................................299
Practice Test.................................................................................................... 309
Answer Sheet......................................................................................... 357
Appendix: Study Matrix........................................................................ 363
Answer Key............................................................................................373
References............................................................................................. 439




                                                                                                                   v
Preface

We have been helping people to prepare for the project management profes-
sional (PMP(R))* certification exam since the A Guide to the Project Management
Body of Knowledge PMBOK(R) Guide was published by the Project Management
Institute (PMI(R)) in 1996. We then prepared the first edition of this Study Guide.
   In 1996, there were approximately 1,000 people who were certified as Project
Management Professional (PMP(R)), while in 2015, there are approximately 700,000
PMP(R)s around the world. Throughout the years, we have updated our PMP
Practice Test and Study Guide books so that now this book is in its 10th Edition.
   Since our first Study Guide book was published, it has become quite clear that
most prospective exam takers (ourselves included when we studied for the exam)
ask two questions when they decide to earn PMP(R) certification: "What topics are
covered on the exam?" and "What are the questions like?" Not surprisingly, some
of the most sought-after study aids are practice tests, which are helpful in two
ways: first, taking practice tests increases your knowledge of the kinds of ques-
tions, phrases, terminology, and sentence construction that you will encounter
on the "real" exam; and second, taking practice tests provides an opportunity for
highly concentrated study by exposing you to a breadth of project management
content generally not found in a single reference source.
   We initiated and continued the development of this specialty publication with
only one simple goal in mind: to help you study for, and pass, the PMP(R) certifi-
cation exam. Because (PMI(R)) does not sell "past" exams to prospective certifica-
tion candidates for study purposes, the best anyone can do is to develop practice
test questions that are as representative of the real questions as possible. And
that is exactly what we have done. This tenth edition contains 600 practice test
questions.
   As we developed this publication, we have worked hard to make the ques-
tions difficult ones yet representative of what you may encounter on the actual
exam. Having attained the PMP(R), we know it is a difficult exam, and one that
requires study and dedicated effort.

*   "PMP" is a certification mark of the Project Management Institute, Inc., which is registered in the United
    States and other nations.
    "PMI" is a service and trademark of the Project Management Institute, Inc., which is registered in the
    United States and other nations.

                                                                                                             vii
viii    Preface


            The result of our effort is the PMP(R) Exam: Practice Test and Study Guide. This
        tenth edition contains study hints, a list of exam topics, and 40 multiple-choice
        questions for each of the ten knowledge areas presented in A Guide to the Project
        Management Body of Knowledge Fifth Edition (PMBOK(R) Guide).*
            And, as in previous editions, this edition includes a plainly written ratio-
        nale for each correct answer, with a reference to the appropriate pages in the
        PMBOK(R) Guide, and in some cases to the other sources.
            We have listened to your comments and have expanded our rationales to dis-
        cuss in more depth why an answer is correct, often by explaining why the other
        answers are incorrect, and to help you broaden your understanding of the con-
        cepts in the answer. We also have provided some study tips in these rationales.
            You additionally will find a reference to one or more of the five process
        groups, Initiating, Planning, Executing, Monitoring and Controlling, or Closing at
        the end of each rationale. Those references are important because they give you
        an understanding of the types of exam questions that fall within each of these
        five major project management performance domains.
            What is different, however, with this tenth edition is each question also con-
        tains a reference to the June 2015, "Examination Content Outline (ECO)", pub-
        lished by PMI, which is the blueprint for the exam. You can download the ECO
        from the PMI web site, and you will see it consists of numerous tasks associated
        with the domains on the exam. These domains are the process groups, and we
        have a chapter in this tenth edition that describes each domain in more depth.
        This tenth edition is completely aligned with this new ECO.
            This tenth edition includes scenario-based questions, which may comprise
        approximately 50 percent of the questions found on the PMP(R) exam. It omits
        many of the purely definitional questions, but focuses on the key concepts you
        need to understand and study. Additionally, we have reduced the length of many
        of our questions, to more accurately represent the real exam.
            We have included a completely original, 200-question on-line practice test,
        which is also in the book. We have a Study Matrix in this edition as well. The
        matrix is included as an appendix. The matrix, which is based on PMI(R)'s Role
        Delineation Study, the basic document for the ECO, will help you to use the
        200-question exam to its full advantage. It provides a way for you to assess your
        strengths and weaknesses in each performance domain and to identify areas that
        require further study.
            A special note to those who speak English as a second language (ESL): Our
        experience in teaching project management programs around the world has
        shown that most of our ESL clients understand English well enough to pass
        the PMP(R) exam as long as they know the content. Nevertheless, in an effort to
        avoid adding to your frustration before taking the exam, we have painstakingly
        reviewed each question and answer in the Study Guide in the knowledge areas

        *   "PMBOK" is a trademark of the Project Management Institute, Inc., which is registered in the United States
            and other nations.
                                                                               Preface      ix


and in the practice test to ensure that we did not use words, terms, or phrases
that could be confusing to those who are not fluent in English.
   Although the language issue may concern you, and rightfully so, the only
difference between you and those who speak English as their first language is
the amount of time it takes to complete the exam. We know of only one person
who did not have enough time, and that individual was able to complete all but
two questions. We would suggest, therefore, that if you can grasp the content
expressed in this publication, a few colloquialisms or ambiguous terms on the
real exam will not ultimately determine whether you pass or fail: Your subject
matter knowledge will do that!
   Earning the PMP(R) certification is a prestigious accomplishment. But studying
for it need not be difficult if you use the tools available. You may want to include
our companion piece, PMP(R) Exam Challenge! Sixth Edition in your study plan if
you have not already done so. In an easy flash-card format, it too provides many
opportunities to become thoroughly familiar and comfortable with the project
management body of knowledge.



On-line Practice Test
To access this practice test, please contact pmptest10@ittoday.info. The on-line
test lasts four hours and has a clock that ticks down to show you how much time
you have left in the four hours for the exam. Once you have answered all the
questions or time runs out, you will be scored by domain and also through a
proprietary algorithm we have prepared that shows based on our questions, you
will see whether you were Proficient, Moderately, or Below in a domain.
   Good luck on achieving your PMP(R) certification!

                                                                    Ginger Levin
                                                          Lighthouse Point, Florida

                                                                  J. LeRoy Ward
                                                             Madison, Connecticut
Acknowledgements

Our special thanks to our editor, John Wyzalek, who personally edited each
question and then proofread the entire book later under a tight deadline; our
publisher, Rich O'Hanley, who sets the stage for success at CRC; our production
team including Randy Burling, who gave this book a special priority to make
sure it would be available to you as the exam changed; and Jessica Vakili, who
worked under a very tight schedule; cover designer Elise Weinger; and Michelle
Rivera-Spann and her team in marketing.




                                                                                  xi
Introduction

The PMP(R) exam contains 200 questions, of which 25 questions will not be
included in the pass/fail determination. These "pretest" items, as PMI(R) calls them,
will be randomly placed throughout the exam to gather statistical information
on their performance to determine their use for future exams. The questions on
the exam are distributed as follows by process group following the PMI PMP
Examination Content Outline (ECO)--June 2015.

   13% or 26 questions relate to Initiating the Project
   24% or 48 questions relate to Planning the Project
   31% or 62 questions relate to Executing the Project
   25% or 50 questions relate to Monitoring and Controlling the Project
   7% or 14 questions relate to Closing the Project

For the practice test in this book, we provide all 200 questions as if they were
real questions, and the percentages above are applied to the 200 questions.
There are no pretest questions in our practice exam. We also have linked each
question to a specific task in one of the domains in the ECO especially since
some of the questions on the PMP exam are based on the tasks in the ECO,
and some tasks are not covered in A Guide to the Project Management Body of
Knowledge (PMBOK(R) Guide) Fifth Edition.
   There also are not a certain number of the scored 175 questions that you
must answer correctly. PMI(R) explains in its PMP Credential Handbook--revised
26 June 2015, it generates a pass/fail score based on proficiency levels in the
answers in each of the five process groups or domains. This approach means
that you will learn whether you were Proficient, Moderately Proficient or Below
Proficient in each process group.
   PMI(R) defines on page 34 of the Handbook these terms as follows:

   Proficient--indicates performance is above the average level of knowledge
   in this chapter. (Note: We interpret chapter to mean domain)
   Moderately Proficient--performance is at the average level of knowledge in
   this chapter
   Below Proficient--performance is below average of knowledge in this
   chapter

                                                                                  xiii
xiv  Introduction


       These scores are established based on a psychometric analysis as PMI(R) uses sub-
       ject matter experts throughout the world to establish a point in which it feels a
       candidate for the exam should be able to pass a question and establishes a level
       of difficulty for each question. We do not know the algorithm PMI(R) uses to estab-
       lish the proficiency levels. Our practice exam, therefore, scores each question
       equally, which means you will learn the number of questions you answer cor-
       rectly in each of the five process groups. Obviously, your goal is to be Proficient,
       and our goal is that this book can assist you in your quest to attain the Proficient
       level.
           To use the study guide effectively, work on one section at a time. It does not
       matter which one you choose first. Start by reading the study areas. They provide
       useful background on the content of the PMP(R) exam and identify the emphasis
       placed on various topics. Familiarize yourself with the major topics listed. Then
       answer the 40 practice questions, recording your answers on the sheet provided.
       Finally, compare your answers with those in the answer key. The rationales
       provided should clarify any misconceptions you may have had, and the process
       group or domain designations will give you an understanding of the types of
       questions you might see on the exam that relate to those process groups. We
       have expanded in this tenth edition the rationales for the correct answer to assist
       you in understanding why the answer is correct and provided more details to
       help in greater understanding on the topic. For further study and clarification,
       you may want to consult the bibliographic reference.
           After you have finished answering the questions that follow each section, it is
       time to take the completely rewritten and original, 200-question practice test that
       has the number of questions by domain or process group in the ECO. Note your
       answers on the sheet provided, compare your answers to the answer key, and
       use the Study Matrix in the Appendix to determine what areas you need to study
       further.
            We also have this test on-line. To access it, please contact pmptest10@ittoday.
       info. The on-line test lasts four hours and has a clock that ticks down and shows
       you how much time you have left in the four hours for the exam. At the end,
       you will see your score by domain and also through a proprietary algorithm we
       have prepared that shows based on our questions whether you were Proficient,
       Moderately Proficient, or Below Proficient in a domain.
           It is our recommendation that you take this four-hour on-line test first to see
       your areas of strength and areas of improvement after you feel you have mas-
       tered the material and are ready to take the PMP. Then, try it again. You then
       have a benchmark and can see if you do need further study.
           To make the most of this book, use it regularly. Take and retake the practice
       test in the book. Photocopy the answer sheet in order to have a clean one each
       time you retake the test. Our suggestion is to score at least 80% of the questions
       in our practice test and on-line test correctly before you take the PMP(R) exam.
           You may want to convene a study group to compare your answers with those
       of your colleagues. This method of study is a powerful one. You will learn more
                                                                        Introduction      xv


from your colleagues than you ever thought possible! Make sure you have a solid
understanding of the exam topics that are provided in each section. Consult
our extensive bibliography, or other sources you have found useful, for further
independent study. And, most important, create a study plan and stick to it.
Your chances of success are raised dramatically when you dedicate yourself to
your goal.
   We also suggest that when you go to the testing center, you go with a com-
pletely positive attitude. By this time, you have done your very best to master the
project management concepts you will see on the exam.
Authors

Dr. Ginger Levin is a senior consultant, author, and educator in the project
management field with 49 years of experience. Her specialty areas are portfolio
management, program management, change management, the project manage-
ment office, metrics, and maturity assessments. She is certified as a PMP(R) and
PgMP(R). She was the second person in the world to receive the PgMP. In 2014,
she won PMI's Eric Jenett Award.
    In addition, Dr. Levin is an Adjunct Professor for the University of Wisconsin-
Platteville where she teaches in its M.S. in Project Management Program, and for
SKEMA University, France, in its doctoral programs in project management. Six of
her students have won the Project Management Institute's (PMI(R)) Student Paper
of the Year Award.
    In consulting, she has served as project manager in numerous efforts for
Fortune 500 and public sector clients, including Genentech, Cargill, Abbott
Vascular, UPS, Citibank, the Food and Drug Administration, General Electric,
SAP, EADS, John Deere, Schreiber Foods, TRW, New York City Transit Authority,
the U.S. Joint Forces Command, and the U.S. Department of Agriculture. Prior
to her work in consulting, she held positions of increasing responsibility with
the U.S. Government, including the Federal Aviation Administration, Office of
Personnel Management, and the General Accounting Office.
    Dr. Levin is the editor, author, and co-author of approximately 20 books and
is a series editor on advanced books in portfolio and program management for
CRC Press. She presents regularly to the Project Management Institute and other
organizations.
    Dr. Levin received her doctorate in Information Systems Technology and
Public Administration from The George Washington University and received the
Outstanding Dissertation Award for her research on large organizations.
    In her spare time, she is an active volunteer for PMI.
    Please see: linkedin.com/in/gingerlevin

J. LeRoy Ward is President of Ward Associates, offering project, program and
portfolio consulting and advisory services to corporations worldwide. Formerly, Mr.
Ward was the Executive Vice President of ESI International responsible for R&D,
Product Strategy and Consulting. Additionally, he spent more than 16 years with
four U.S. federal agencies in the fields of cartography and information technology.

                                                                                xvii
xviii  Authors


           Mr. Ward has authored nine publications and more than 40 articles in proj-
       ect, program and portfolio management, which have appeared in such publica-
       tions as the Financial Times, PM Network, ProjectManager Today, CIO, and other
       notable trade and business publications. He authored the Dictionary of Project
       Management Terms (3rd ed.); with Ginger Levin, he authored the PMP(R) Exam
       Practice Test and Study Guide, PMP(R) Exam Challenge, PgMP(R) Exam Practice
       Test and Study Guide, PgMP(R) Exam Challenge and, Program Management
       Complexity: A Competency Model; and with Carl Pritchard, The Portable PMP(R)
       Prep: Conversations on Passing the PMP(R) Exam.
           A dynamic and popular speaker and keynote presenter, Mr. Ward frequently
       speaks on project management and related topics at professional associations, cli-
       ent events, and conferences worldwide. Since 1991, he has worked to provide the
       most comprehensive guidance to project management practitioners, helping them
       pass the PMP Exam.
           Mr. Ward holds Bachelor of Science and Master of Science degrees from
       Southern Connecticut State University and a Master of Science degree in technol-
       ogy management from The American University where he was inducted into Phi
       Alpha Alpha, the National Honorary Society for Public Affairs and Administration.
       He is an alumnus of the U.S. General Services Administration's Trail Boss
       Program (for major systems acquisitions) and the Federal Executive Institute, the
       U.S. Government's premiere leadership institute.
           He also holds the PMP, PgMP, and PfMP(R) certifications from the Project
       Management Institute (PMI(R)); the CSM (Certified Scrum Master) credential from
       the Scrum Alliance; and, is certified by both The George Washington University
       School of Business, and the Stanford University School of Engineering, as a "cer-
       tified project manager." Mr. Ward is also the recipient of the prestigious 2013 Eric
       Jenett Project Management Excellence Award from PMI.
           Please see: linkedin.com/in/jleroyward

       Dr. Levin and Mr. Ward have been helping people prepare for the PMP(R)
       since 1996, when the first edition of this Practice Test and Study Guide and
       the PMP Challenge! were published. By attending and presenting at PMI
       Congresses and to PMI Chapters around the world and reading as much as pos-
       sible in the field, they keep up with the best practices to follow. While they
       each have other publications on their own, they have collaborated on a compa-
       rable Practice Test and Study Guide for the Program Management Professional
       (PgMP(R)) exam and a PgMP(R) Challenge. They authored Program Management
       Complexity: A Competency Model, published in 2011, and led the development
       of ESI's Maturity Models: PortfolioFrameworkTM, Program FrameworkTM and
       ProjectFrameworkTM. Further, they are series editors for CRC in books on project
       and program management.
Acronyms

AC               actual cost
BAC              budget at completion
CAPM(R)          Certified Associate in Project Management
CCB              Change Control Board
CEO              chief executive officer
CPI              cost performance index
CPM              critical path method
CSM              Certified Scrum Master
CV               cost variance
EAC              estimate at completion
ECO              Examination Content Outline
EMV              expected monetary value
ERP              enterprise resource planning
ESL              English as a second language
ETC              estimate to complete
EV               earned value
EVA              economic value added
EVM              earned value management
ID               identification
IFB              invitation for bid
ISO              International Organization for Standardization
IT               information technology
LCC              life-cycle cost
MRP              material requirements planning
OBS              organizational breakdown structure
PDM              precedence diagramming method
PERT             program evaluation and review technique
PfMP(R)          Portfolio Management Professional
PgMP(R)          Program Management Professional
PMP              performance measurement baseline
PMBOK(R) Guide   A Guide to the Project Management Body of Knowledge
PMI(R)           Project Management Institute
PMIS             project management information system

                                                                       xix
xx      Acronyms


         PMM       Project Management Methodology
         PMO       program management office
         PMP(R)    Project Management Professional
         PV        planned value
         QA        quality assurance
         RACI      responsible, accountable, consult, inform
         RAM       responsibility assignment matrix
         RBS       resource breakdown structure
         RBS       risk breakdown structure
         R&D       research and development
         RF        radio frequency
         RFP       request for proposal
         ROI       return on investment
         SD        standard deviation
         SIPOC     suppliers, inputs, process, outputs, customers
         SPC       statistical process control
         SPI       schedule performance index
         SV        schedule variance
         SWOT      strengths-weaknesses-opportunities-threats
         TCPI      to-complete performance index
         VAC       variance at completion
         WBS       work breakdown structure
Project Integration Management


Study Hints
The Project Integration Management questions on the PMP(R) certification exam
address critical project management functions that ensure coordination of the
various elements of the project. As the PMBOK(R) Guide explains the processes
focus on integration activities designed to ensure project success; therefore,
integration characteristics involve unification, consolidation, communication, and
integrative activities. Project Integration Management involves making decisions
about resource use, trade-offs among competing objectives and alternatives, and
managing the interdependencies between the ten knowledge areas. It addresses
project initiation with developing a project charter, developing a project plan,
directing and managing the project work, monitoring and controlling the project
work, performing integrated change control, and closing the project or a phase.
These six processes not only interact with one another but also interact with
processes in the other nine knowledge areas. It is important to note PMI(R)'s view
that integration occurs in other areas as well. For example, project scope and
product scope need to be integrated, project work needs to be integrated with
other ongoing work of the organization, and deliverables from various technical
specialties need integration.
    The Project Integration Management questions are relatively straightforward.
Most people find them to be fairly easy. But because they cover so much mate-
rial, including all five process groups as well as some of the materials from
the first two chapters in the PMBOK(R) Guide, you do need to study them care-
fully to become familiar with PMI(R)'s terminology and perspectives. PMBOK(R)
Guide Figure 4-1 provides an overview of the structure of Project Integration
Management. Know this chart thoroughly.
    Following is a list of the major Project Integration Management topics. Use it
to help focus your study efforts on the areas most likely to appear on the exam.




                                                                                     1
                                               Project Integration Management    3


Major Topics
Project, program, and portfolio definitions
Project management definition
Project life cycle
Project management office (PMO)
Project process groups

   Initiating
   Planning
   Executing
   Monitoring and Controlling
   Closing

Business case
Project statement of work
Develop project charter

Enterprise environmental factors
Organizational process assets
Project management information system (PMIS)
Facilitation techniques
Analytical techniques
Expert judgment
Project management plan

Direct and manage project work
Key management reviews
Corrective and preventive action
Deliverables
Work performance information
Meetings
Project baselines
Subsidiary plans
Standards and regulations

Monitor and control project work
Validated changes
Forecasts

Integrated change control
Change requests
Change control meetings
Change control procedures
4    PMP(R) Exam Practice Test and Study Guide


         Change management plan
         Configuration management plan
         Change log
         Approved change requests

         Close project or phase
         Administrative closure procedure
         Accepted deliverables
         Product, service, or result transition
         Lessons learned
                                                       Project Integration Management    5


Practice Questions
   INSTRUCTIONS: Note the most suitable answer for each multiple-choice
   question in the appropriate space on the answer sheet.

 1. You work for a software development company that has followed the
    waterfall development model for more than 20 years. Lately, a number of
    customers have complained that your company is taking too long to complete
    its projects. You attended a class on agile development methods and believe
    that if the company used the agile approach, it could provide products
    to c lients in a shorter time period. However, it would be a major culture
    change to switch from the waterfall methodology to the agile approach and
    to train staff members in this new approach. You mentioned this idea to
    the director of the PMO, and although she liked the idea, she would need
    approval from the company's portfolio review board to move forward with
    it. She suggested that you document this idea in a--
   a.   Business need description
   b.   Product scope description
   c.   Project charter
   d.   Business case

 2. You are managing a large project with 20 key internal stakeholders, eight
    contractors, and six team leaders. You must devote attention to effective
    integrated change control. This means you are concerned primarily with--
   a. Reviewing, approving, and controlling changes
   b. Maintaining baseline integrity, integrating product and project scope, and
      coordinating change across knowledge areas
   c. Integrating deliverables from different functional specialties on the project
   d. Establishing a change control board that oversees the overall project
      changes

 3. You plan to hold a series of meeting as you execute the project plan. While
    different attendees will attend each meeting, a best practice to follow is to:
   a. Group stakeholders into categories to determine which ones should
      attend each meeting
   b. Not mix the types of meetings on your project
   c. Be sensitive to the fact that stakeholders often have very different objec-
      tives and invite them to determine the meeting's agenda
   d. Recognize that roles and responsibilities may overlap so focus on holding
      meetings primarily for decision making
6    PMP(R) Exam Practice Test and Study Guide


           4. You are the project manager in charge of developing a new shipping container
              for Globus Ocean Transport, which needs to withstand winds of 90 knots and
              swells of 30 meters. In determining the dimension of the container and the
              materials to be used in its fabrication, you convene a group of knowledgeable
              professionals to gather initial requirements, which will be included in the--
             a.   Project charter
             b.   Bill of materials
             c.   WBS
             d.   Project Statement of Work

           5. You have assembled a core team to develop the project management plan
              for the next generation of fatigue fighting drugs. The science is complex, and
              the extended team of researchers, clinicians, and patients for trials exceeds
              500 people. The content of your project management plan will be directed
              primarily by two factors. They are--
             a.   Project complexity and the capability of resources
             b.   Number of resources and project schedule
             c.   Team member experience and budget
             d.   Application area and complexity

           6. When you established the change control board for your avionics project,
              you established specific procedures to govern its operation. The procedures
              require all approved changes to baselines to be reflected in the--
             a.   Performance measurement baseline
             b.   Change management plan
             c.   Quality assurance plan
             d.   Project management plan

           7. You are beginning a new project staffed with a virtual team located across five
              countries. To help avoid conflict in work priorities among your team members
              and their functional managers, you ask the project sponsor to prepare a--
             a. Memo to team members informing them that they work for you now
             b. Project charter
             c. Memo to the functional managers informing them that you have authority
                to direct their employees
             d. Human resource management plan

           8. The purpose of economic value added (EVA) is to--
             a.   Determine the opportunity costs associated with the project
             b.   Determine a non-time-dependent measure of profit or return
             c.   Assess the net operating profit after taxes
             d.   Evaluate the return on capital percent versus the cost of capital percent
                                                        Project Integration Management    7


 9. Facilitation techniques are used throughout project management. Your
    company is embarking on a project to completely eliminate defects in its
    products. You are the project manager for this project, and you are devel-
    oping your project charter. To assist you, which of the following facilitation
    techniques did you use?
   a.   Surveys
   b.   Delphi approach
   c.   Meeting management
   d.   Focus groups

10. The direct and manage project work process truly is important in project
    management. It affects many other key processes and uses inputs from
    others. Working with your team at its kickoff meeting, you explain the key
    benefit of this process is to--
   a.   Implement approved changes
   b.   Provide overall management of the project work
   c.   Lead and perform activities in the project management plan
   d.   Perform activities to accomplish project objectives

11. You are managing a project in an organization that is characterized by rigid
    rules and policies and strict supervisory controls. Your project, sponsored
    by your CEO who is new to the company, is to make the organization less
    bureaucratic and more participative. You are developing your project man-
    agement plan. Given the organization as it now is set up, as you prepare
    your plan, you can use which of the following organizational process
    assets--
   a.   Guidelines and criteria
   b.   Project management body of knowledge for your industry
   c.   Organizational structure and culture
   d.   The existing infrastructure

12. You are fairly new to managing a project but have been a team member for
    many years. You are pleased you were selected to manage your company's
    2018 model line of hybrid vehicles. You are now planning your project and
    have been preparing the subsidiary plans as well. You realize some project
    documents also are required to help manage your project. An example of
    one that you believe will be especial helpful is the--
   a.   Business case
   b.   Key performance indicators
   c.   Project management information system
   d.   Project statement of work
8    PMP(R) Exam Practice Test and Study Guide


          13. You work for a telecommunications company, and when developing a proj-
              ect management plan for a new project, you found that you must tailor some
              company processes because the product is so different than those products typi-
              cally produced by your company. To tailor these processes, you will follow--
             a.   Standardized guidelines and work instructions
             b.   Stakeholder risk tolerances
             c.   Expert judgment
             d.   Structure of your company

          14. You are implementing a project management methodology for your com-
              pany that requires you to establish a change control board. Which one of
              the following statements best describes a change control board?
             a.   Recommended for use on all (large and small) projects
             b.   Used to review, evaluate, approve, delay, or reject changes to the project
             c.   Managed by the project manager, who also serves as its secretary
             d.   Composed of key project team members

          15. An automated tool, project records, performance indicators, data bases, and
              financials are examples of items in--
             a.   Organizational process assets
             b.   Project management information systems
             c.   Project management planning approaches
             d.   The tools and techniques for project plan development

          16. You realize that projects represent change, and on your projects, you always
              seem to have a number of change requests to consider. In your current
              project to manage the safety of the nation's cheese products and the testing
              methods used, you decided to prepare a formal change management plan.
              An often overlooked type of change request is--
             a.   Adding new subject matter experts to your team
             b.   Updates
             c.   Work performance information
             d.   Enhancing the reviews performed by your project's governance board

          17. You have been directed to establish a change control system for your com-
              pany, but must convince your colleagues to use it. To be effective, the
              change control system must include--
             a. Procedures that define how project documents may be changed
             b. Specific change requests expected on the project and plans to respond to
                each one
             c. Performance reports that forecast project changes
             d. A description of the functional and physical characteristics of an item or
                system
                                                        Project Integration Management    9


18. You are working on the next generation of software for mobile phones for
    your telecommunications company. While time to market is critical, you
    know from your work on other projects that management reviews can be
    helpful and plan to use them on your project. You are documenting them as
    part of your--
   a.   Governance plan
   b.   Change management plan
   c.   Performance reviews
   d.   Project management plan

19. Your cost control specialist has developed a budget plan for your project
    to add a second surgical center to the Children's Hospital. As you analyze
    cash flow requirements, you notice that cash flow activity is greatest in the
    closing phase. You find this unusual because on most projects the largest
    portion of the budget is spent--
   a.   Initiating
   b.   Monitoring and Controlling
   c.   Controlling
   d.   Executing

20. You are project manager for a systems integration effort and need to procure
    the hardware components from external sources. Your subcontracts admin-
    istrator has told you to prepare a product description, which is referenced
    in a--
   a.   Project statement of work
   b.   Contract scope statement
   c.   Request for proposal
   d.   Contract

21. Because your project is slated to last five years, you believe rolling wave
    planning is appropriate. It provides information about the work to be
    done--
   a.   Throughout all project phases
   b.   For successful completion of the current project phase
   c.   For successful completion of the current and subsequent project phases
   d.   In the next project phase
10    PMP(R) Exam Practice Test and Study Guide


        22. You want to minimize the impact of changes on your project, yet you want
            to ensure that change is managed when and if it occurs. This can be done
            through each of the following ways EXCEPT--
            a.   Rejecting requested changes
            b.   Approving changes and incorporating them into a revised baseline
            c.   Documenting the complete impact of requested changes
            d.   Ensuring that project scope changes are reflected in changes to product
                 scope

        23. You are managing a project to introduce a new product to the marketplace
            that is expected to have a very long life. In this situation, the concept of
            being temporary, which is part of the definition of a project,--
            a.   Does not apply because the project will have a lasting result
            b.   Does not apply to the product to be created
            c.   Recognizes that the project team will outlive the actual project
            d.   Does not apply because the project will not be short in duration

        24. When closing a project, it is a best practice to--
            a.   Update the project documents
            b.   Prepare a sustainment plan for the project's benefits
            c.   Measure product scope against the project management plan
            d.   Review the scope baseline

        25. All the following are project baselines that are generally part of the project
            management plan EXCEPT--
            a.   Technical
            b.   Scope
            c.   Time
            d.   Cost

        26. You are responsible for a project management training curriculum that is
            offered throughout the organization. In this situation, your intangible deliver-
            ables are--
            a.   Employees who can apply the training effectively
            b.   Training materials for each course
            c.   Certificates of completion for everyone who completes the program
            d.   The training curriculum as advertised in your catalog
                                                       Project Integration Management    11


27. Working on your project management training curricula project, you
    decided it would be beneficial to you to become an active member of the
    Project Management Institute as part of the objectives of your project is to
    ensure it is aligned with PMI(R)'s best practices. To complement PMI(R)'s Work
    Breakdown Structure Practice Standard, you learned PMI(R) was requesting
    volunteers to participate in development of a similar standard on the Scope
    Statement. You volunteered, and now the Standard is issued. This is an
    example of--
   a.   Improving your own competency as a project manager
   b.   Corrective action
   c.   Preventive action
   d.   A requirement for you to immediately update your project management
        plan

28. Ideally, a project manager should be selected and assigned at which point in
    the project life cycle?
   a.   During the initiating processes
   b.   During the project planning process
   c.   At the end of the concept phase of the project life cycle
   d.   Prior to the beginning of the development phase of the project life cycle

29. Closing a project phase should not be delayed until project completion
    because--
   a.   Useful information may be lost
   b.   The project manager may be reassigned
   c.   Project team members may be reassigned by that time
   d.   Sellers are anxious for payments

30. As you are working on your telecommunications project, even though
    you are using agile methods, you realize you are preparing an extensive
    amount of data and information. You regularly share data with your project
    team. Your last team meeting focused on the number of change requests
    and also the start and finish dates of activities in your schedule. They are
    examples of--
   a.   Key performance indicators
   b.   Work performance reports
   c.   Work performance data
   d.   Work performance information
12      PMP(R) Exam Practice Test and Study Guide


          31. Project management processes describe project work, while product-oriented
              management processes specify the project's product. Therefore, a project
              management process and a product-oriented management process--
              a.   Overlap and interact throughout the project
              b.   Are defined by the project life cycle
              c.   Are concerned with describing and organizing project work
              d.   Are similar for each application area

          32. The close project or phase process addresses actions and activities concern-
              ing all of the following EXCEPT--
              a.   Completion or exit criteria for the project or phase have been met
              b.   Stakeholder approval that the project has met their requirements
              c.   Review of the project and/or phase information for potential future use
              d.   Documentation that completed deliverables have been accepted

          33. You are a personnel management specialist recently assigned to a project
              team working on a team-based reward and recognition system. The other
              team members also work in the human resources department. The project
              charter should be issued by--
              a.   The project manager
              b.   The client
              c.   A sponsor
              d.   A member of the PMO who has jurisdiction over human resources

          34. Your project is proceeding according to schedule. You have just learned that
              a new regulatory requirement will cause a change in one of the project's
              performance specifications. To ensure that this change is incorporated into
              the project management plan, you should--
              a. Call a meeting of the change control board
              b. Change the WBS, project schedule, and project plan to reflect the new
                 requirement
              c. Prepare a change request
              d. Immediately inform all affected stakeholders of the new approach to take
                 on the project
                                                      Project Integration Management    13


35. Different types of project phases are used on projects, and each phase cul-
    minates in the completion of at least one deliverable. The high-level nature of
    these phases means they are an element of the project life cycle. Some phases
    start before others complete. If this approach is followed, it may result in--
   a.   An increase in the number of issues
   b.   Increasing the schedule
   c.   The need for a CCB
   d.   More rework

36. Assume your company is a leader in the market in production of cereal
    products. It has been in this market for over 50 years. You are the project
    manager for a new product that is a derivative from the company's core
    product. As you determine a life cycle for this project, you believe you
    should follow one that is--
   a.   Incremental
   b.   Predictive
   c.   Iterative
   d.   Adaptive

37. Oftentimes when a project is terminated, senior managers will replace the
    project manager with an individual who is skilled in closing out projects. If
    this is done, the first step for the termination manager should be to--
   a.   Notify all relevant stakeholders of the termination
   b.   Complete the lessons learned report
   c.   Conduct an immediate review of the work packages
   d.   Review the status of all contracts

38. On your project you want to avoid bureaucracy, so you adopt an informal
    approach to change control. The main problem with this approach is--
   a. There is no "paper trail" of change activity
   b. Regular disagreements between the project manager and the functional
      manager will occur
   c. There are misunderstandings regarding what was agreed upon by
      stakeholders
   d. There is a lack of sound cost estimating to assess the change's impact

39. Projects are supposed to succeed, not fail. However, termination is an option
    to consider when all but which one of the following conditions exist?
   a.   The customer's strategy has changed.
   b.   There are new stakeholders.
   c.   Competition may make the project results obsolete.
   d.   The original purposes for the project have changed.
14    PMP(R) Exam Practice Test and Study Guide


        40. All projects involve some extent of change, because they involve work that
            is unique in some fashion. Therefore, it is important that a project manage-
            ment plan includes a--
            a. Description of the change request process
            b. Configuration management plan
            c. Methodology for preventive action to avoid the need for excessive
               changes
            d. A work authorization system
                                         Project Integration Management    15


Answer Sheet

1.    a   b    c   d   21.   a   b   c    d

2.    a   b    c   d   22.   a   b   c    d

3.    a   b    c   d   23.   a   b   c    d

4.    a   b    c   d   24.   a   b   c    d

5.    a   b    c   d   25.   a   b   c    d

6.    a   b    c   d   26.   a   b   c    d

7.    a   b    c   d   27.   a   b   c    d

8.    a   b    c   d   28.   a   b   c    d

9.    a   b    c   d   29.   a   b   c    d

10.   a   b    c   d   30.   a   b   c    d

11.   a   b    c   d   31.   a   b   c    d

12.   a   b    c   d   32.   a   b   c    d

13.   a   b    c   d   33.   a   b   c    d

14.   a   b    c   d   34.   a   b   c    d

15.   a   b    c   d   35.   a   b   c    d

16.   a   b    c   d   36.   a   b   c    d

17.   a   b    c   d   37.   a   b   c    d

18.   a   b    c   d   38.   a   b   c    d

19.   a   b    c   d   39.   a   b   c    d

20.   a   b    c   d   40.   a   b   c    d
                                                     Project Integration Management    17


Answer Key

 1. d. Business case
       The business case is used to provide the necessary information to
       determine whether or not a project is worth its investment. It is used
       to justify the project and typically contains a cost-benefit analysis and a
       business need. [Initiating]
       PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 69
       PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Initiating, 5, Task 1

 2. a. Reviewing, approving, and controlling changes
       Performing integrated change control consists of coordinating and
       managing changes across the project. Activities that occur within the
       context of Performance Integrated Change Control include: validate
       scope, control scope, control schedule, control costs, perform quality
       assurance, control quality, manage the project team, control commu-
       nications, control risks, conduct procurements, control procurements,
       manage stakeholder engagement, and control stakeholder engagement.
       [Monitoring and Controlling]
       PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 94-95
       PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Monitoring and
       Controlling, 9, Task 1

 3. b. Not mix the types of meetings on your project
       Meetings are a tool and technique used in Direct and Manage Project
       Work. Meetings tend to be one of three types: information exchange;
       brainstorming, option evaluation, or design; or decision making. A best
       practice is to not combine the types of meetings and prepare for them
       with a well-defined agenda, purpose, objective, and time frame. They
       should be documented using minutes and action items. [Executing]
       PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 84
       PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Executing, 8, Task 6

 4. a. Project charter
       The project charter documents the business needs, assumptions, con-
       straints, understanding of the customer needs and high-level require-
       ments and what the new product, service, or result is to satisfy. It is the
       document used to formally authorize the project. [Initiating]
       PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 71-72
       PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Initiating, 5, Task 5
18      PMP(R) Exam Practice Test and Study Guide


           5. d. Application area and complexity
                   The content of the project management plan is primarily influenced by
                   the application area [in this case drug development] and complexity of
                   the project. The size of the plan is typically commensurate with the size
                   and complexity of the project. [Planning]
                   PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 74
                   PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Planning, 6, Task 1

           6. d. Project management plan
                   The project management plan must be updated with changes to sub-
                   sidiary plans and baselines subject to formal change control processes.
                   Those changes must be communicated to appropriate stakeholders in a
                   timely manner. [Monitoring and Controlling]
                   PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 100
                   PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Monitoring and
                   Controlling, 9, Task 2

            7. b. Project charter
                   Although the project charter cannot stop conflicts from arising, it can
                   provide a framework to help resolve them, because it describes the
                   project manager's authority to apply organizational resources to project
                   activities. In addition it documents the business needs, assumptions,
                   constraints, an understanding of the customer's needs and high-
                   level requirements, and the project's new product, service, or result.
                   [Initiating]
                   Meredith, J.R. and Mantel, Jr., S.J., Project Management: A Managerial
                   Approach, 2012, 228
                   PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 71-72
                   PMI(R)PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Initiating, 5, Task 5
                                                     Project Integration Management    19


8. d. Evaluate the return on capital percent versus the cost of capital percent
       EVA quantifies the value a company provides to its investors and seeks
       to determine if a company is creating or destroying value to its share-
       holders. It is calculated by subtracting the expected return, (represented
       by the capital charge), from the actual return that a company generates,
       (represented by net operating profit after taxes). As a decision is made
       to determine whether or not to initiate a project based on its business
       case, a variety of cost-benefit analyses typically are undertaken, and
       EVA is one that is extremely useful. [Initiating]
       Stewart B.G, Best Practice-EVA: The Definitive Guide to Measuring and
       Maximizing Stakeholder Value, 2013, p. 300
       PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 69
       PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Initiating, 5, Task 7

 9. c. Meeting management
       Meeting management is an example of a facilitation technique used in
       developing the project charter as meetings may be held with key stake-
       holders and subject matter experts. Other facilitation techniques used
       to guide preparation of the charter are brainstorming, problem solving,
       and conflict resolution. [Initiating]
       PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 71
       PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Initiating, 5, Task 5

10. b. Provide overall management of the project work
       While all of the answers apply to the direct and manage project work
       process, the key benefit is that it involves providing overall management
       of the work of the project, encompassing the other answers listed. In
       this question, the key words were "the key benefit". Had the question
       instead asked about the purpose of the process, answer c would have
       been the correct choice. [Executing]
       PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 79
       PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Executing, 8, Task 2
20    PMP(R) Exam Practice Test and Study Guide


          11. a. Guidelines and criteria
                   While you are managing a different type of project, the organization
                   has managed projects before and therefore may have as part of its orga-
                   nizational process assets a project management plan template, which
                   sets forth guidelines and criteria to tailor the organization's processes to
                   satisfy specific needs of the project. In addition, project closure guid-
                   ance or requirements, such as the product validation and acceptance
                   criteria, may be part of organizational process assets for use in the tem-
                   plate for the project management plan. [Planning]
                   PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 75
                   PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Planning, 6, Task 11

          12. d. Project statement of work
                   The project statement of work is a useful document as it describes the
                   products, services, or results the project is to deliver. It references the
                   business need, product scope description, and the strategic plan. While
                   the question relates to planning, the statement of work also is used
                   to develop the project's charter. In planning, it is listed one of many
                   project documents that are not part of the project management plan.
                   [Initiating and Planning]
                   PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 68, 78
                   PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Initiating, 5, Task 2
                   PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Planning, 6, Task 1

          13. a. Standardized guidelines and work instructions
                   Standardized guidelines and work instructions are an organizational
                   process asset to consider as the project management plan is developed.
                   They include guidelines and criteria to tailor the organization's set of
                   standard processes to satisfy the specific needs of the project. [Planning]
                   PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 75
                   PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Planning, 6, Task 11
                                                      Project Integration Management    21


14. b. Used to review, evaluate, approve, delay, or reject changes to the project
        The change control board's powers and responsibilities should be well
        defined and agreed upon by key stakeholders. On some projects, mul-
        tiple change control boards may exist with different areas of responsi-
        bility. It is a formally chartered group, and in addition to the items in
        the answer, it also records and communicates decisions that are made.
        The level of change control depends on the application area and proj-
        ect complexity as well as the project's environment. On some change
        control boards, customer and/or sponsor approval may be required for
        certain change requests, unless a customer representative or a sponsor
        is a board member. [Monitoring and Controlling]
        PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 96
        PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Monitoring and
        Controlling, 9, Task 2

15. b. Project management information systems
        The items listed are part of these systems, a tool and technique in both
        executing and monitoring and control processes. In executing, it is con-
        sidered part of environmental factors and also includes a work authori-
        zation system, a configuration management system, and an information
        collection and distribution system along with interfaces to other auto-
        mated systems. Automated gathering and reporting on key performance
        indicators can be part of the PMIS. In monitoring and controlling, it also
        includes scheduling, cost, and resourcing tools in addition to the items
        in the answer. [Executing and Monitoring and Controlling]
        PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 84, 92
        PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Executing, 8, Task 2
        PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Monitoring and
        Controlling, 9, Task 1

16. b. Updates
        Change requests may include corrective actions, preventive actions,
        defect repairs, or updates. Updates are changes to formally controlled
        project documents or plans to reflect modified or additional content.
        [Executing]
        PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 85
        PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Executing, 8, Task 4
22  PMP(R) Exam Practice Test and Study Guide


         17. a. Procedures that define how project documents may be changed
                 A change control system is a collection of formal, documented pro-
                 cedures that define the process used to control change and approve
                 or reject changes to project documents, deliverables, or baselines. It
                 includes the paperwork, tracking systems, and approval levels necessary
                 to authorize changes. Changes may be requested by any stakeholder
                 involved with the project. The goal is to review all change requests,
                 approve and manage changes to deliverables and organizational process
                 assets, project documents, and the project management plan, and com-
                 municate their disposition. [Monitoring and Controlling]
                 PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 94, 96
                 PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Monitoring and
                 Controlling, 9, Task 1
         18. d. Project management plan
                 The project management plan describes how the project will be exe-
                 cuted and monitored and controlled. While it contains a number of sub-
                 sidiary plans, it also contains other items including information on key
                 management reviews for contents, their extent, and timing to address
                 open issues and pending decisions. [Planning]
                 PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 76-77
                 PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Planning, 6, Task 11

         19. d. Executing
                 Executing is where the majority of the budget is spent because this
                 is the process where all of the resources (people, material, etc.) are
                 applied to the activities and tasks in the project management plan. It
                 also involves coordinating people and other resources, managing stake-
                 holder expectations, and integrating and performing the work described
                 in the project management plan. [Executing]
                 PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 56
                 PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Executing, 8, Task 2

         20. a. Project statement of work
                 The project statement of work describes in a narrative form the prod-
                 ucts, services, or results that the project will deliver. For external proj-
                 ects, it can be received from the customer as part of the bid document.
                 It references the product scope description, business need, and the
                 strategic plan. [Initiating]
                 PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 68
                 PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Initiating, 5, Task 2
                                                      Project Integration Management    23


21. c. For successful completion of the current and subsequent project phases
       Rolling wave planning provides progressive detailing of the work to be
       accomplished throughout the life of the project, indicating that plan-
       ning and documentation are iterative and ongoing processes. Through
       this approach, where a more general and high-level plan is available,
       more detailed planning is executed for appropriate time windows as
       new work activities are to begin and resources are to be assigned. The
       work in the near term then is planned. In detail, while future work
       is planned at a higher level. It is especially useful on longer projects.
       [Planning]
       PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 45 and 560
       PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Planning, 6, Task 11

22. d. Ensuring that project scope changes are reflected in changes to product
       scope
       Integrated change control requires maintaining the integrity of base-
       lines by releasing only approved changes into project products, ser-
       vices, or results. It also ensures that changes to product scope are
       reflected in the project scope definition. This is done by coordinating
       changes across the entire project. The project management plan, proj-
       ect scope statement, and other deliverables are maintained by carefully
       and continuously managing changes and in doing so by ensuring only
       approved changes are incorporated into a revised baseline. [Monitoring
       and Controlling]
       PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 94, 96, and 99-100
       PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Monitoring and
       Controlling, 9, Task 2

23. b. Does not apply to the product to be created
       A project is completed when its objectives have been achieved or when
       they are recognized as being unachievable, and the project is termi-
       nated, or when the need for the project no longer exists. Thus, the con-
       cept of temporary applies to the project life cycle--not the product life
       cycle. Further, temporary does not necessarily mean the project's dura-
       tion is short as it refers to the project's engagement and its longevity. It
       also does not typically apply to the product, service, or result as most
       projects are undertaken to create a lasting outcome with social, eco-
       nomic, or environmental impacts that far outlive the project. [Planning]
       PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 3-4
       PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Planning, 6, Task 1
24    PMP(R) Exam Practice Test and Study Guide


        24. d. Review the scope baseline
                 In closing the project, it is necessary to ensure that the project work is
                 completed, and the project has met its objectives. Since project scope
                 is measured against the project management plan, the project manager
                 then reviews the scope baseline to ensure completion. [Closing]
                 PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 101
                 PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Closing, 11, Task 3

        25. a. Technical
                 Scope, time, and cost are examples of project baselines to be part of
                 the project management plan. A technical baseline would be covered
                 by the scope baseline.
                 PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 76
                 PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Planning, 6, Task 11

        26. a. Employees who can apply the training effectively
                 Most deliverables are tangible, such as buildings or roads, but intangible
                 deliverables also can be provided and may be even more important.
                 Work performance data are collected during direct and manage project
                 work and is passed on to the monitoring and controlling processes of
                 each process area for further analysis. [Executing]
                 PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 84-85
                 PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Executing, 8, Task 2

        27. b. Corrective action
                 When you volunteered, you signed a confidentiality statement so
                 you could not disclose what was under way on this activity. Now the
                 Standard has been issued, and to stay in alignment with PMI(R)'s best
                 practices, you need to issue a change request based on corrective action
                 to realign the performance of the work of your project with your project
                 management plan. [Executing]
                 PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 85
                 PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Executing, 8, Task 4
                                                       Project Integration Management    25


28. a. During the initiating processes
        When the project manager is selected and assigned to the project dur-
        ing initiation, several of the usual start-up tasks for a project are sim-
        plified. In addition, becoming involved with project activities from the
        beginning helps the project manager to understand where the project
        fits within the organization in terms of its priority relative to other
        projects and the ongoing work of the organization. Further, if assigned
        early, the project manager can participate in development of the project
        charter. [Initiating]
        Meredith, J.R. and Mantel, Jr., S.J., Project Management: A Managerial
        Approach, 2012, 101
        PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 67
        PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Initiating, 5, Task 6

29. a. Useful information may be lost
        Closure includes collecting project records, ensuring that the records
        accurately reflect final specifications, analyzing project or phase success
        and effectiveness, and archiving such information for future use. Each
        phase of the project should be properly closed while important project
        information is still available. A key benefit is it provides lessons learned,
        the formal ending of project work, and the release of resources to pur-
        sue new endeavors. [Closing]
        PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 100-101
        PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Closing, 11, Task 5

30. c. Work performance data
        Work performance data are the raw observations and measurements
        identified during activities performed to carry out the work of the
        project. Other examples are the reported percent of work physically
        completed, quality and technical performance measures, number of
        defects, actual costs, and actual durations. It is important to note that
        the PMBOK(R) recognizes the terms data and information are used inter-
        changeably in practice, which can lead to confusion among stakehold-
        ers. It has therefore set up a classification system of work performance
        data, work performance information, and work performance reports.
        [Executing]
        PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 59
        PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Executing, 8, Task 6
26      PMP(R) Exam Practice Test and Study Guide


          31. a. Overlap and interact throughout the project
                   Project management processes and product-oriented management pro-
                   cesses must be integrated throughout the project's life cycle, given their
                   close relationship. In some cases, it is difficult to distinguish between
                   the two. For example, knowing how the product will be created aids in
                   determining the project's scope. However, the project life cycle is inde-
                   pendent from the product that is produced or modified by the project.
                   The project should take the current life-cycle phase of the product into
                   consideration. [Executing]
                   PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 38-39
                   PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Executing, 8, Task 2

          32. d. Documentation that completed deliverables have been accepted
                   Documentation that the completed deliverables have been accepted is
                   prepared as an output of validate scope, which then is forwarded to the
                   close project or phase process. The close project or phase procedures
                   provide a listing of necessary activities, including: confirmation that
                   the project has met sponsor, customer, and other stakeholder require-
                   ments; satisfaction and validation that the completion and exit criteria
                   have been met; the transfer of deliverables to the next phase or to
                   production/operations has been accomplished; and activities to collect,
                   audit, and archive project information and gather lessons learned have
                   been addressed. [Closing]
                   PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 100-103
                   PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Closing, 11, Task 1

          33. c. A sponsor
                   The project charter should be issued by a project initiator or sponsor
                   who formally authorizes the project and provides the project manager
                   with the authority to apply organizational resources to project activi-
                   ties. The sponsor may be a person or a group and is accountable for
                   enabling success, providing resources and support for the project. The
                   project charter should not be issued by the project manager, although,
                   the project manager can assist in its development. [Initiating]
                   PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 71
                   PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Initiating, 5, Task 6
                                                     Project Integration Management    27


34. c. Prepare a change request
       The change request should detail the nature of the change and its effect
       on the project. Documentation is critical to provide a record of the
       change and who approved it, in case differences of opinion arise later.
       A change request is an output from the direct and manage project work
       process and an input to the perform integrated change control process
       It serves to modify any document, deliverable, or baseline, Change
       requests can be direct or indirect, externally or internally initiated, and
       can be optional or legally or contractually mandated. It should be noted
       that while change requests may include corrective action, preventive
       action, defect repair, and updates, corrective and preventive actions do
       not normally affect the project baselines, only the performance against
       the baselines. [Executing and Monitoring and Controlling]
       PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 85, 97
       PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Executing, 8, Task 4
       PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Monitoring and
       Controlling, 9, Task 2

35. d. More rework
       The question is an example of an overlapping relationship between
       phases. It is used to compress the schedule through fast tracking as
       an example. By overlapping phases more resources may be needed,
       risks may increase, and more rework may result if a significant phase
       progresses before accurate information is available from the previous
       phase. It should be noted that there is no ideal structure that applies to
       all projects; some only have one phase, while other projects even in the
       same organization may have several phases. Overlapping relationships
       and sequential relationships are the two basic types of phase-to-phase
       relationships. In contrast, in the sequential approach, a phase starts only
       after the previous phase is complete. This sequential approach reduces
       uncertainty but may eliminate options for reducing the overall schedule.
       [Executing]
       PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 42-43
       PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Executing, 8, Task 2
28    PMP(R) Exam Practice Test and Study Guide


          36. b. Predictive
                   A predictive life cycle or one that is fully plan driven is recommended
                   if the product to be delivered is well understood, there is a substantial
                   base of industry practice, or if a product is required to be delivered
                   in full to have value to stakeholder groups. The project's scope, time,
                   and cost to deliver it are determined in the project life cycle as early as
                   possible. In this type of life cycle, projects proceed through a series of
                   sequential or overlapping phases, with each phase focusing on a subset
                   of project activities and project management processes. [Planning]
                   PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 44-45
                   PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Planning, 6, Task 12

          37. c. Conduct an immediate review of the work packages
                   A thorough review of the work packages will provide a complete
                   accounting of the physical progress achieved on the project. This is
                   the first step in attempting to improve performance. The project man-
                   ager reviews prior information, investigates and documents the reasons
                   for actions taken if the project is terminated before completion, and
                   engages stakeholders as appropriate in the process. [Closing]
                   Cleland, D. and Ireland, L., Project Manager's Handbook, 2007, 365-375
                   PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 101
                   PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Closing, 11, Task 5

          38. c. There are misunderstandings regarding what was agreed upon by
                 stakeholders
                   Using a formal, documented approach to change management reduces
                   the level of misunderstanding or uncertainty regarding the nature of the
                   change and its impact on cost and schedule. For large projects, change
                   control boards are recommended. Another key benefit is it allows for
                   documented changes within the project to be considered in an inte-
                   grated fashion, which helps to reduce risks if changes are made without
                   consideration to the project's overall objectives or plans. [Monitoring
                   and Controlling]
                   Meredith, J.R. and Mantel, Jr., S.J., Project Management: A Managerial
                   Approach, 2012, 500
                   PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 94
                   PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Monitoring and
                   Controlling, 9, Task 2
                                                    Project Integration Management    29


39. b. There are new stakeholders.
       As long as the new stakeholders agree with the project's business case
       and have little or limited influence with the project, the work should
       continue. However, if any of the other events occur, termination should
       be considered. Ideally, the organization has project closure guidelines
       that include the necessary steps to take should termination be neces-
       sary. Also recommended is formal documentation that states why ter-
       mination was needed and is part of the project closure documents.
       [Closing]
       Cleland, D. and Ireland, L., Project Manager's Handbook, 2007, 365-375
       PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 101, 104
       PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Closing, 11, Task 3

40. b. Configuration management plan
       A configuration management plan is part of a project management plan
       to document how configuration management will be performed on the
       project. It documents configuration identification, configuration status
       accounting, and configuration verification and audit activities that will
       be performed as well as whether change control boards will be used.
       [Planning]
       PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 77, 96-97
       PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Planning, 6, Task 11
Project Scope Management


Study Hints
The Project Scope Management questions on the PMP(R) certification exam cover
a diverse, yet fundamental, set of project management topics. Planning scope
management activities, collecting requirements, defining requirements with a
scope statement, creating the work breakdown structure (WBS), validating the
scope with accepted deliverables, and managing scope changes are among the
topics covered.
   PMI(R) views scope management as a six-step processes that consists of: plan
scope management, collect requirements, define scope, create WBS, validate
scope, and control scope. PMBOK(R) Guide Figure 5-1 provides an overview of the
structure of Project Scope Management. Know this chart thoroughly.
   The Project Scope Management questions on the exam are straightforward.
Historically, most people have found these questions to be relatively easy;
however, do not be lulled into a false sense of security by past results. These
questions cover a wide breadth of material, and you must be familiar with the
terminology and perspectives adopted by PMI(R).
   You also may wish to consult PMI(R)'s Practice Standard for Work Breakdown
Structures--Second Edition (2006) for additional information. Its Requirements
Guide (2013) is another great resource along with its Practice Standard on
Configuration Management (2007).
   Following is a list of the major Project Scope Management topics. Use it to
help focus your study efforts on the areas most likely to appear on the exam.




                                                                             31
                                                     Project Scope Management      33


Major Topics
Plan Scope Management

   Preparing a scope management plan
   Preparing a requirements management plan

Collect requirements

   Tools and techniques
   Requirements documentation
   Requirements traceability matrix

Define scope

   Product analysis
   Alternatives analysis
   Facilitated workshops
   Project scope statement

Create WBS

   Benefits
   Uses
   Development/decomposition
   WBS dictionary
   Scope baseline

Validate scope

   Inspection
   Group decision-making techniques
   Accepted deliverables
   Change requests
   Work performance information

Control scope

   Variance analysis
   Work performance information
   Updates to the project management plan and to the project documents
                                                           Project Scope Management     35


Practice Questions
   INSTRUCTIONS: Note the most suitable answer for each multiple-choice
   question in the appropriate space on the answer sheet.

 1. Progressive elaboration of product characteristics on your project must be
    coordinated carefully with the--
   a.   Proper project scope definition
   b.   Project stakeholders
   c.   Scope change control system
   d.   Customer's strategic plan

 2. You are examining multiple scope change requests on a project you were
    asked to take over because the previous project manager decided to resign.
    To assess the degree to which the project scope will change, you need to
    compare the requests to which project document?
   a.   Preliminary scope statement
   b.   WBS
   c.   Change management plan
   d.   Scope management plan

 3. You and your project team recognize the importance of project scope man-
    agement to a project's overall success; therefore, you include only the work
    required for successful completion of the project. The first step in the Project
    Scope Management process is to--
   a. Clearly distinguish between project scope and product scope
   b. Prepare a scope management plan
   c. Define and document your stakeholders' needs to meet the project's
      objectives
   d. Capture and manage both project and product requirements

 4. An example of an organizational process asset that could affect how project
    scope is to be managed is--
   a.   Personnel administration
   b.   Marketplace conditions
   c.   Historical information
   d.   Organizational culture
36    PMP(R) Exam Practice Test and Study Guide


           5. You are managing a complex project for a new method of heating and air
              conditioning in vehicles. You will use both solar and wind technologies
              in this project to reduce energy costs. Therefore, you must ensure that the
              work of your project will result in delivering the project's specified scope,
              which means that you should measure completion of the product scope
              against the--
             a.   Scope management plan
             b.   Project management plan
             c.   Product requirements
             d.   Requirements management plan

           6. A key tool and technique used in Define Scope is--
             a.   Templates, forms, and standards
             b.   Decomposition
             c.   Expert judgment
             d.   Project management methodology

           7. Alternatives generation often is useful in defining project scope. An example
              of a technique that can be used is--
             a.   Sensitivity analysis
             b.   Decision trees
             c.   Mathematical model
             d.   Lateral thinking

           8. Product analysis techniques include all the following EXCEPT--
             a.   Value engineering
             b.   Value analysis
             c.   Systems analysis
             d.   Bill of materials

           9. The baseline for evaluating whether requests for changes or additional work
              are contained within or outside the project's exclusion is provided by the--
             a.   Project management plan
             b.   Project scope statement
             c.   Project scope management plan
             d.   WBS dictionary
                                                           Project Scope Management      37


10. Rather than use a WBS, your team developed a bill of materials to define
    the project's work components. A customer review of this document uncov-
    ered that a scope change was needed, because a deliverable had not been
    defined, and a change request was written subsequently. This is an example
    of a change request that was the result of--
   a.   An external event
   b.   An error or omission in defining the scope of the product
   c.   A value-adding change
   d.   An error or omission in defining the scope of the project

11. Collecting requirements is critical in project scope management as it
    becomes the foundation for the project's--
   a.   Scope management plan
   b.   WBS
   c.   Schedule
   d.   Scope change control system

12. The project scope statement addresses and documents all the following
    items EXCEPT--
   a.   Project exclusions
   b.   The relationship between the deliverables and the business need
   c.   Product scope description
   d.   Project management methodology (PMM)

13. The first step in collecting requirements on any project, large or small,
    is to--
   a.   Talk with the project stakeholders through interviews
   b.   Review the scope management plan
   c.   Conduct facilitated workshops with stakeholders
   d.   Prepare a requirements document template that you and your team can
        use throughout the collect requirements process

14. You want to structure your project so that each project team member has a
    discrete work package to perform. The work package is a--
   a.   Deliverable at the lowest level of the WBS
   b.   Task with a unique identifier
   c.   Required level of reporting
   d.   Task that can be assigned to more than one organizational unit
38    PMP(R) Exam Practice Test and Study Guide


        15. Quality function deployment is one approach for collecting requirements.
            Assume that you have studied the work of numerous quality experts, such
            as Deming, Juran, and Crosby, and your organization has a policy that states
            the importance of quality as the key constraint of all project constraints. You
            and your team have decided to use quality function deployment on your
            new project to manufacture turbines that use alternative fuels. The first step
            you should use is to--
           a.   Determine the voice of the customer
           b.   Build the house of quality
           c.   Address the functional requirements and how best to meet them
           d.   Hold a focus group of prequalified stakeholders

        16. On the WBS, the first level of decomposition may be displayed by using all
            the following EXCEPT--
           a.   Phases of the project life cycle
           b.   Subcomponents
           c.   Major deliverables
           d.   Project organizational units

        17. Change is inevitable on projects. Uncontrolled changes are often referred
            to as--
           a.   Rework
           b.   Scope creep
           c.   Configuration items
           d.   Emergency changes

        18. Each WBS component should be assigned a unique identifier from a code of
            accounts to--
           a. Link the WBS to the bill of materials
           b. Enable the WBS to follow a similar numbering system to that of the orga-
              nization's units as part of the organizational breakdown structure
           c. Sum costs, schedule, and resource information
           d. Link the WBS to the project management plan

        19. In scope control it is important to determine the cause of any unacceptable
            variance relative to the scope baseline. This can be done through--
           a.   Root-cause analysis
           b.   Control charts
           c.   Inspections
           d.   Project performance measurements
                                                          Project Scope Management      39


20. To assist your software development team in collecting requirements from
    potential users and to ensure that agreement about the stakeholders' needs
    exists early in the project, you decide to use a group creativity technique.
    Numerous techniques are available, but you and your team choose a vot-
    ing process to rank the most useful ideas for further prioritization. This
    approach is known as--
   a.   Brainstorming
   b.   Nominal group technique
   c.   Delphi technique
   d.   Affinity diagram

21. You have been appointed project manager for a new project in your organi-
    zation and must prepare a project management plan. You decide to prepare
    a WBS to show the magnitude and complexity of the work involved. No
    WBS templates are available to help you. To prepare the WBS, your first step
    should be to--
   a.   Determine the cost and duration estimates for each project deliverable
   b.   Identify and analyze the deliverables and related work
   c.   Identify the components of each project deliverable
   d.   Determine the key tasks to be performed

22. You want to avoid scope creep on your project and are working hard to
    do so. Your sponsor has asked for regular reports as to how the project is
    performing according to the scope baseline. You should provide the sponsor
    with which one of the following--
   a.   Variance analysis
   b.   Inspection and peer review results
   c.   Work performance information
   d.   The impact analysis results of proposed change requests

23. You are leading a project team to identify potential new products for your
    organization. One idea was rejected by management because it would not
    fit with the organization's core competencies. You need to recommend other
    products using management's guideline as--
   a.   An assumption
   b.   A risk
   c.   A specification
   d.   A technical requirement
40  PMP(R) Exam Practice Test and Study Guide


         24. Validate scope--
            a. Improves cost and schedule accuracy, particularly on projects using inno-
               vative techniques or technology
            b. Is the last activity performed on a project before handoff to the customer
            c. Documents the characteristics of the product, service, or result that the
               project was undertaken to create
            d. Differs from perform quality control in that validate scope is concerned
               with the acceptance--not the correctness--of the deliverables

         25. Any step recommended to bring expected future performance in line with
             the project management plan is called--
            a.   Performance evaluation
            b.   Corrective action
            c.   Preventive action
            d.   Defect repair

         26. One approach that can be used to detect the impact of any change from the
             scope baseline on the project objectives is--
            a.   Requirements traceability matrix
            b.   Review of formal and informal scope control processes and guidelines
            c.   A formal configuration management plan
            d.   Well-documented requirements

         27. Updates of organizational process assets that are an output of Control Scope
             include all the following EXCEPT--
            a.   Causes of variations
            b.   Lessons learned
            c.   Work authorization system
            d.   Reasons certain corrective actions were chosen

         28. Work performance information in Validate Scope includes all the following
             EXCEPT--
            a.   Started deliverables
            b.   Costs authorized and incurred
            c.   Progress of deliverables
            d.   Completed deliverables
                                                          Project Scope Management      41


29. Your project is now under way, and you are working with your team to pre-
    pare your requirements management plan. Which of the following strongly
    influences how requirements are managed?
   a. The phase-to-phase relationship
   b. A set of procedures by which project scope and product scope may be
      changed
   c. Requirements traceability matrix
   d. Requirements documentation

30. You are the project manager on a systems engineering project designed to
    last six years and to develop the next-generation corvette for use in military
    operations. You and your team recognize that requirements may change
    as new technologies, especially in sonar systems, are developed. You are
    concerned that these new technologies may lead to changes in the scope
    of your product, which then will affect the scope of your project. Therefore
    your requirements traceability matrix should include tracing requirements to
    all the following project elements EXCEPT--
   a.   Business needs
   b.   Product design
   c.   Product development
   d.   Project verification

31. Your customer signed off on the requirements document and scope state-
    ment of your video game project last month. Today she stated she would
    like to make it an interactive game that can be played on a television and on
    a computer. This represents a requested scope change that, at a minimum--
   a. Should be reviewed according to the Perform Integrated Change Control
      process
   b. Results in a change to all project baselines
   c. Requires adjustments to cost, time, quality, and other objectives
   d. Results in a lesson learned

32. The key inputs to the Validate Scope process include all the below items
    EXCEPT--
   a. The project management plan (scope management plan and scope
      baseline)
   b. Change requests
   c. Verified deliverables
   d. Requirements traceability matrix
42    PMP(R) Exam Practice Test and Study Guide


        33. Modifications may be needed to the WBS and WBS dictionary because of
            approved change requests, which shows that--
            a.   Re-planning is an output of Control Scope
            b.   Scope creep is common on projects
            c.   Re-baselining will be necessary
            d.   Updates are needed to the scope baseline

        34. You and your team are documenting requirements on you project to control
            fatigue as people need to work more hours to keep up with the competition.
            You decided to set up components for the requirements on your project.
            Acceptance criteria are an example of--
            a.   Stakeholder requirements
            b.   Transition requirements
            c.   Project requirements
            d.   Business requirements

        35. Which following item is NOT an input to Control Scope?
            a.   Requirements traceability matrix
            b.   Work performance information
            c.   Verified deliverables
            d.   Scope management plan

        36. You are the project manager for a subcontractor on a major contract. The
            prime contractor has asked that you manage your work in a detailed man-
            ner. Your first step is to--
            a. Follow the WBS that the prime contractor developed for the project and
               use the work packages you identified during the proposal
            b. Develop a subproject WBS for the work package that is your company's
               responsibility
            c. Establish a similar coding structure to the prime contractor's to facilitate
               use of a common project management information system
            d. Develop a WBS dictionary to show specific staff assignments

        37. The project scope statement is important in scope control because it--
            a.   Is a critical component of the scope baseline
            b.   Provides information on project performance
            c.   Alerts the project team to issues that may cause problems in the future
            d.   Is expected to change throughout the project
                                                             Project Scope Management      43


38. The product scope description is documented as part of the project's scope
    statement. It is important to include it because it--
   a.   Facilitates the project acceptance process
   b.   Describes specific constraints associated with the project
   c.   Progressively elaborates characteristics
   d.   Shows various alternatives considered

39. How is a context diagram used?
   a.   To   depict product scope
   b.   To   trace requirements as part of the traceability matrix
   c.   To   develop the scope management plan
   d.   To   develop the requirements management plan

40. You are establishing a PMO that will have a project management information
    system that will be an online repository of all program data. You will col-
    lect descriptions of all work components for each project under the PMO's
    jurisdiction. This information will form an integral part of the--
   a.   Chart of accounts
   b.   WBS dictionary
   c.   WBS structure template
   d.   Earned value management reports
                                             Project Scope Management      45


Answer Sheet

1.    a   b    c   d   21.   a   b   c   d

2.    a   b    c   d   22.   a   b   c   d

3.    a   b    c   d   23.   a   b   c   d

4.    a   b    c   d   24.   a   b   c   d

5.    a   b    c   d   25.   a   b   c   d

6.    a   b    c   d   26.   a   b   c   d

7.    a   b    c   d   27.   a   b   c   d

8.    a   b    c   d   28.   a   b   c   d

9.    a   b    c   d   29.   a   b   c   d

10.   a   b    c   d   30.   a   b   c   d

11.   a   b    c   d   31.   a   b   c   d

12.   a   b    c   d   32.   a   b   c   d

13.   a   b    c   d   33.   a   b   c   d

14.   a   b    c   d   34.   a   b   c   d

15.   a   b    c   d   35.   a   b   c   d

16.   a   b    c   d   36.   a   b   c   d

17.   a   b    c   d   37.   a   b   c   d

18.   a   b    c   d   38.   a   b   c   d

19.   a   b    c   d   39.   a   b   c   d

20.   a   b    c   d   40.   a   b   c   d
                                                         Project Scope Management      47


Answer Key

 1. a. Proper project scope definition
       Progressive elaboration of a project's specification must be coordinated
       carefully with proper scope definition, particularly when the project is
       performed under contract. When properly defined, the project scope--
       the work to be done--should remain constant even when the product
       characteristics are elaborated progressively. [Planning]
       PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 6, 105-106
       PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Planning, 6, Task 2

 2. b. WBS
       The WBS, along with the detailed scope statement and the WBS dic-
       tionary, defines the project's scope baseline, which provides the basis
       for any changes that may occur on the project. Formal change control
       procedures should be used if the scope baseline requires change.
       On the exam, recognize how the WBS is developed and the definitions
       of a work package, a control account, and a planning package in case
       one appears in the exam. [Planning]
       PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 131-132
       PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Planning, 6, Task 2

 3. b. Prepare a scope management plan
       The work involved in the six Project Scope Management processes
       begins by preparing a scope management plan, which is a subsidiary
       plan for the project management plan. It documents how project scope
       is to be defined, validated, and controlled. It also describes the Project
       Scope Management processes from definition to control and provides
       guidance as to how scope will be managed throughout the project. It
       contains processes to prepare a project scope statement and then to
       prepare the WBS, how the WBS will be maintained and approved, how
       formal acceptance of the deliverables will be done, and how requests
       for changes will be controlled. [Planning]
       PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 106-107, 109-110
       PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Planning, 6, Task 2
48  PMP(R) Exam Practice Test and Study Guide


          4. c. Historical information
                 In addition to the answer, organizational process assets that can influ-
                 ence plan scope management include formal and informal policies,
                 procedures, and guidelines impacting project scope management. The
                 lessons-learned knowledge base is another example of an organiza-
                 tional process asset. [Planning]
                 PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 109
                 PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Planning, 6, Task 2

          5. c. Product requirements
                 Completion of the project scope is measured against the project man-
                 agement plan, and completion of the product scope is measured against
                 the requirements. In the project context, product scope consists of
                 features and functions that characterize the product, service, or result.
                 Project scope is the work that must be done to deliver the product, ser-
                 vice, or result with specified features and functions. [Planning]
                 PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 105-106
                 PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Planning, 6, Task 1

          6. c. Expert judgment
                 Expert judgment is used to analyze the information needed to develop
                 a project scope statement. It is applied to any technical details. Expert
                 judgment can be provided by any group or individual with specialized
                 knowledge or training such as other parts of the organization, consul-
                 tants, stakeholders, professional and technical associations, industry
                 groups, and subject matter experts. [Planning]
                 PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 122
                 PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Planning, 6, Task 2

          7. d. Lateral thinking
                 Lateral thinking, brainstorming, and analysis of alternatives are exam-
                 ples of alternatives generation that can be used to develop as many
                 potential options as possible to execute and perform the project's work.
                 Lateral thinking first was used in 1967 by Edward de Bono and refers
                 to the ability to think `outside the box', using inspiration, and creativity.
                 [Planning]
                 PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 123
                 PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Planning, 6, Task 2
                                                        Project Scope Management      49


8. d. Bill of materials
       Product analysis techniques vary by application area, and each appli-
       cation area generally has accepted methods to translate project objec-
       tives into tangible deliverables and requirements. These techniques are
       used for those products with a product as a deliverable. Other product
       analysis techniques include product breakdown, requirements analysis,
       requirements analysis, systems engineering, value analysis, and value
       engineering. [Planning]
       PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 122
       PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Planning, 6, Task 2

 9. b. Project scope statement
       Project exclusion identifies generally what is excluded from the proj-
       ect. These scope exclusions help manage stakeholder expectations. It
       enables the project manager and team to perform more detailed plan-
       ning, guides work during execution, and provides the baseline to evalu-
       ate whether requests for changes or additional work are contained
       within or outside of the project's boundaries. [Planning]
       PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 123
       PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Planning, 6, Task 13

10. b. An error or omission in defining the scope of the product
       The bill of materials provides a hierarchical view of the physical assem-
       blies, subassemblies, and components needed to build a manufactured
       product, whereas the WBS is a deliverable-oriented grouping of project
       components used to define the total scope of the project, providing a
       structured vision of what has to be delivered. Using a bill of materials
       where a WBS would be more appropriate may result in an ill-defined
       scope and subsequent change requests. These change requests may
       include preventive or corrective action, defect repairs, or enhancement
       requests. [Monitoring and Controlling]
       PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 125-126, 140
       PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Monitoring and
       Controlling, 9, Task 2
50    PMP(R) Exam Practice Test and Study Guide


        11. b. WBS
                 Collecting requirements provides the basis for defining project scope
                 and product scope. It also involves determining, documenting, and
                 managing stakeholder needs to meet project objectives. Requirements
                 documentation is an input to the Create WBS process as detailed
                 requirement documentation is essential to understand what needs to be
                 produced by the project and what needs to be done to deliver the proj-
                 ect and its final products. The requirements become the foundation for
                 the WBS; moreover, cost, schedule, and quality planning are built upon
                 the requirements, and the requirements management plan is a compo-
                 nent of the project management plan. [Planning]
                 PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 110, 127
                 PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Planning, 6, Task 2

        12. d. Project management methodology (PMM)
                 The PMM is an organization-approved approach for project man-
                 agement that is used on every project in some organizations. It is
                 not part of the project scope statement, which describes the project
                 scope description deliverables, acceptance criteria, project exclusions,
                 assumptions, and constraints. The project scope statement documents
                 the entire scope, including product and project scope and describes
                 the project's deliverables and the work required to complete them.
                 It provides a common understanding of the project's scope among
                 stakeholders. [Planning]
                 PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 123-124
                 PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Planning, 6, Task 2

        13. b. Review the scope management plan
                 The scope management plan is reviewed first as it provides clarity as
                 to how the project team will determine which requirements need to
                 be collected on the project. The next step is to work to document the
                 requirements and prepare a requirements traceability matrix. [Planning]
                 PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 113, 117-119
                 PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Planning, 6, Task 13
                                                            Project Scope Management       51


14. a. Deliverable at the lowest level of the WBS
       A work package is the lowest or smallest unit of work division in a
       project or WBS. The work package can be used to group activities
       where work is scheduled and estimated, monitored, and controlled.
       Recognize that in the context of the WBS, work refers to work prod-
       ucts or deliverables that are the result of activity, not the activity itself.
       [Planning]
       PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 126
       PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Planning, 6, Task 2

15. a. Determine the voice of the customer
       Quality function deployment is an example of a facilitated workshop.
       It starts by collecting customer needs, which also are known as the
       voice of the customer. The next step is to objectively sort and priori-
       tize these needs and set goals to achieve them. Facilitated workshops
       are a tool and technique in the Collect Requirements process; other
       examples are joint application development sessions and user stories.
       They are all focused sessions to bring stakeholders together to define
       requirements, with an emphasis on those that are cross-cutting and
       on reconciling stakeholder differences early in the project. Since these
       sessions are interactive, if they are conducted effectively, they can build
       trust, foster relationships, and improve communications among those
       stakeholders who participate. An objective is to increase stakeholder
       consensus and to discover issues earlier and resolve them quicker than
       would be possible if individual sessions were used. [Planning]
       PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 114
       PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Planning, 6, Task 13
52  PMP(R) Exam Practice Test and Study Guide


         16. d. Project organizational units
                 The WBS includes all work needed to be done to complete the proj-
                 ect. The WBS structure can be represented by phases of the project life
                 cycle, which are shown at the second level of decomposition. Product
                 and project deliverables are at the third level (see Figure 5-11 in the
                 PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013 as an example). Another way to represent the
                 WBS is to show major deliverables at the second level of decomposition
                 (see Figure 5-13 in the PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013). The third way is to incor-
                 porate subcomponents, which may be developed from outside of the
                 project team such as contracted work. In this case, the seller develops
                 the supporting contract WBS as part of the contacted work. The orga-
                 nizational breakdown structure (OBS) is a hierarchical representation
                 of the project organization and shows the relationship between project
                 activities and the organizational units responsible for these activities.
                 [Planning]
                 PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 126, 129-130, 548
                 PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Planning, 6, Task 2

         17. b. Scope creep
                 Project scope creep is typically the result of uncontrolled changes in
                 product or project scope without adjustments to time, cost, or resources.
                 Scope control works to control the impact of any project scope changes,
                 manage actual changes when they occur, and is integrated with other
                 control processes. Scope control ensures all requested changes and
                 recommended, corrective, or preventive actions are processed through
                 the Perform Integrated Change Control process. [Monitoring and
                 Controlling]
                 PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 137
                 PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Monitoring and
                 Controlling, 9, Task 2

         18. c. Sum costs, schedule, and resource information
                 The key document generated from the create WBS process is the actual
                 WBS. Each WBS work package is assigned to a control account with
                 a unique identifier established for the work package from the code of
                 accounts. These identifiers provide a structure for hierarchical summa-
                 tion of costs, schedule, and resource information. [Planning]
                 PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 132
                 PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Planning, 6, Task 2
                                                         Project Scope Management      53


19. d. Project performance measurements
       Variance analysis is a tool and technique for Control Scope to determine
       the cause and degree of difference between the baseline and actual
       performance. Project performance measurements are used to assess
       the magnitude of variance from the original scope baseline. In scope
       control it is important to determine the cause and degree of the vari-
       ance relevant to the scope baseline and to decide whether corrective or
       preventive action is required. [Monitoring and Controlling]
       PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 139
       PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Monitoring and
       Controlling, 9, Task 1

20. b. Nominal group technique
       The nominal group technique enhances brainstorming with a voting
       process, which is used to rank the most useful ideas for further brain-
       storming or for prioritization. It is a group creativity technique used in
       Collect Requirements; other group creativity techniques are brainstorm-
       ing, idea/mind mapping, affinity diagrams, and multiple criteria decision
       analysis. [Planning]
       PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 115
       PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Planning, 6, Task 13

21. b. Identify and analyze the deliverables and related work
       Identifying and analyzing the deliverables and related work is the first
       step in the decomposition of a project, a tool and technique in the
       Create WBS process. Decomposition divides and subdivides the scope
       and deliverables into smaller parts that are more manageable. The
       deliverables should be defined in terms of how the project will be orga-
       nized. For example, the major project deliverables may be used as the
       second level. Once the deliverables and related work are identified, the
       other steps in decomposition are to structure and organize the related
       work, decompose upper WBS levels into lower-level detailed compo-
       nents, develop and assign identification codes to the WBS components,
       and verify the degree of decomposition of the deliverable is appropri-
       ate. Review figure 5-11 in the PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013. [Planning]
       PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 128-129
       PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Planning, 6, Task 2
54    PMP(R) Exam Practice Test and Study Guide


          22. c. Work performance information
                   Work performance information is an output of the Control Scope pro-
                   cess. It includes correlated and contextualized information on how the
                   project scope is performing against the scope baseline. It may include
                   categories of changes received, identified scope variances and their
                   causes, the impact on schedule or cost, and the forecast of future scope
                   performance. It provides the foundation for making scope decisions.
                   [Monitoring and Controlling]
                   PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 139
                   PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Monitoring and
                   Controlling, 9, Task 2

          23. a. An assumption
                   Assumptions are factors that, for planning purposes, are considered to
                   be true, real, or certain without proof or demonstration. They are listed
                   in the project scope statement or in a separate log. It also is important
                   to describe the potential impact of assumptions if they prove to be
                   false. It is typical for project teams to identify, document, and validate
                   assumptions as part of planning. [Planning]
                   PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 124, 529
                   PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Planning, 6, Task 2

          24. d. Differs from perform quality control in that validate scope is concerned
                 with the acceptance--not the correctness--of the deliverables
                   Documentation that the customer has accepted completed deliverables
                   is an output of validate scope. Acceptance criteria are formally signed
                   off and approved by the customer or sponsor. The formal documen-
                   tation also is received from the customer or sponsor acknowledg-
                   ing formal stakeholder acceptance of the deliverables of the project.
                   [Monitoring and Controlling]
                   PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 134
                   PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Monitoring and
                   Controlling, 9, Task 1
                                                         Project Scope Management      55


25. b. Corrective action
       Recommended corrective action is an output from Control Scope.
       In addition to bringing expected future performance in line with
       the project management plan, it also serves to bring expected future
       performance in line with the project scope statement. [Monitoring and
       Controlling]
       PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 93, 140, 534
       PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Monitoring and
       Controlling, 9, Task 2

26. a. Requirements traceability matrix
       It is an input to the Control Scope process as it helps to detect the
       impact of any change or deviation from the scope baseline to the proj-
       ect objectives. The requirements traceability matrix is a grid that links
       product requirements from their origin to the deliverables that satisfy
       them. It helps ensure each requirement adds business value by link-
       ing it to business and project objectives. See Figure 5-6 in the PMBOK(R)
       Guide, 2013 for an example. [Monitoring and Controlling]
       PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 118-119, 138
       PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Monitoring and
       Controlling, 9, Task 2

27. c. Work authorization system
       The work authorization system is not used in Control Scope. The others
       are examples of organizational process assets that may require update
       as a result of scope control. Other outputs of this process are work
       performance information, change requests, updates to the project man-
       agement plan in terms of updates to the scope baseline and other base-
       lines, and updates to project documents, which are the requirements
       documentation and the requirements traceability matrix. [Monitoring
       and Controlling]
       PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 139-140
       PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Monitoring and
       Controlling, 9, Task 2
56    PMP(R) Exam Practice Test and Study Guide


        28. b. Costs authorized and incurred
                 Work performance information is an output of Validate Scope. It
                 emphasizes deliverables--whether or not they have started, their prog-
                 ress, and ones that have finished or have been accepted. This informa-
                 tion is communicated to stakeholders. [Monitoring and Controlling]
                 PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 136
                 PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Monitoring and
                 Controlling, 9, Task 1

        29. a. Phase-to-phase relationship
                 The requirements management plan defines how requirements will be
                 analyzed, documented, and managed. It is strongly influenced by the
                 phase-to-phase relationship as it influences how requirements will be
                 managed. The project manager selects the most effective relationship
                 for the project and documents it in the plan; many of the requirements
                 management components are based on that relationship. [Planning]
                 PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 42-44, 110
                 PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Planning, 6, Task 11

        30. d. Project verification
                 The requirements traceability matrix is an output of the Collect
                 Requirements process. It includes tracing requirements to business
                 needs, opportunities, and objectives; project objectives; project scope:
                 WBS deliverables; product design; product development; test strategy
                 and scenarios; as well as high-level requirements to more detailed
                 requirements. [Planning]
                 PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 118-119
                 PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Planning, 6, Task 11

        31. a. Should be reviewed according to the Perform Integrated Change Control
               process
                 A requested change is an output from the Control Scope process. Such
                 a change should be handled according to the integrated change con-
                 trol process and may result in an update to the scope baseline or other
                 components of the project management plan. Change requests can
                 include preventive or corrective actions, defect repair, or enhancement
                 requests. [Monitoring and Controlling]
                 PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 140
                 PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Monitoring and
                 Controlling, 9, Task 1
                                                         Project Scope Management      57


32. b. Change request
       The change requests are not an input of the Validate Scope process
       but are an output. The other inputs are the: project management plan,
       requirements documentation, requirements traceability matrix, veri-
       fied deliverables, and work performance information. [Monitoring and
       Controlling]
       PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 134-135
       PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Monitoring and
       Controlling, 9, Task 1

33. d. Updates are needed to the scope baseline
       If the approved change requests have an effect on the project scope, the
       scope statement, the WBS, and the WBS dictionary need to be revised
       and reissued to reflect the approved changes following the Perform
       Integrated Change Control process. [Monitoring and Controlling]
       PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 140
       PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Monitoring and
       Controlling, 9, Task 2

34. c. Project requirements
       Various components of requirements documentation can be used.
       Examples are: business requirements, stakeholder requirements, solu-
       tion requirements, project requirements, transition requirements, and
       requirements assumptions, dependencies, and constraints. Project
       requirements consist of acceptance criteria and levels of service perfor-
       mance, safety, and compliance. [Planning]
       PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 117-118
       PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Planning, 6, Task 11

35. b. Work performance information
       Other inputs include all the answers listed except work performance
       information. Another input is work performance data. [Monitoring and
       Controlling]
       PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 134-135
       PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Monitoring and
       Controlling, 9, Task 2
58    PMP(R) Exam Practice Test and Study Guide


        36. b. Develop a subproject WBS for the work package that is your company's
               responsibility
                 Work packages are items at the lowest level of the WBS. A subproject
                 is a smaller portion of the original project when a project is subdivided
                 into more manageable components or pieces. A subproject WBS then
                 breaks down work packages into greater detail. The WBS is represented
                 in this way to incorporate a subcomponent, which may be developed
                 by organizations outside of the project team such as contractors. The
                 seller develops the supporting contract WBS as part of the contracted
                 work. [Planning]
                 PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 129, 564
                 PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Planning, 6, Task 11

        37. a. Is a critical component of the scope baseline
                 The project scope statement, along with the WBS and WBS dictionary,
                 is a key input to Control Scope. They form the scope baseline, which is
                 compared to actual results to determine if a change, corrective action,
                 or preventive action is needed. [Monitoring and Controlling]
                 PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 138
                 PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Monitoring and
                 Controlling, 9, Task 1

        38. c. Progressively elaborates characteristics
                 The project scope statement describes the deliverables and the work
                 required to create them. It also provides a common understanding of
                 the scope among stakeholders. The product scope statement is a key
                 component as it progressively elaborates the characteristics of the prod-
                 uct, service, or result in the project charter and requirements documen-
                 tation. [Planning]
                 PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 123
                 PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Planning, 6, Task 11
                                                         Project Scope Management      59


39. a. To depict product scope
       It is a tool and technique in Collect Requirements and is an example of
       a scope model. The context diagram visually depicts the product scope
       as it shows a business system (process, equipment, or computer, etc.)
       and how people and other systems (actors) interact with it. The diagram
       shows inputs to the business system, the actor(s) providing the input,
       outputs from the business system, and actor(s) receiving the output.
       [Planning]
       PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 117
       PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Planning, 6, Task 11

40. b. WBS dictionary
       The WBS dictionary typically includes a code of accounts identifier,
       a description of work, assumptions and constraints, responsible orga-
       nization, a list of schedule milestones, associated schedule activities,
       required resources, cost estimates, quality requirements, acceptance
       criteria, technical references, and agreement information. It provides
       detailed deliverable, activity, and scheduling information about each
       component in the WBS and is part of the project's scope baseline.
       [Planning]
       PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 132
       PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Planning, 6, Task 11
Project Time Management


Study Hints
The Project Time Management questions on the PMP(R) certification exam focus
heavily on the program evaluation and review technique (PERT), the criti-
cal path method (CPM), the precedence diagramming method (PDM), and the
critical chain method; the differences between these four techniques; and the
appropriate circumstances for their use. The exam tests your knowledge of how
PERT/CPM networks are constructed, how schedules are computed, what the
critical path is, and how networks are used to analyze and solve project sched-
uling, and resource allocation and leveling issues. There is a good chance that
you will be presented with a network diagram that will be the subject of five or
more questions. Therefore, detailed knowledge of network scheduling is essen-
tial. There also seems to be a focus on fast tracking as a method to accelerate the
project schedule. You must know the advantages offered by networks over bar
charts and network diagrams. You also should understand the concept of float
(or slack) and how it presents challenges and opportunities to project schedul-
ers. Additionally, you may see questions about the earned value formulas relative
to scheduling such as the Schedule Variance (SV) and the Schedule Control
Index (SPI).
    Because a thorough understanding of networks and scheduling is required to
successfully answer questions on Project Time Management, you can if you wish
take a course relating to that topic. If you cannot take a course, you may want to
consult the user's manual for one of the more popular desktop software project
management packages. Also, please consult and consider reading PMI's Practice
Standard for Scheduling, Second Edition (2011) as it contains a wealth of informa-
tion to augment what is in the PMBOK. Typically, you will find plenty of illus-
trations and short, easy-to-understand scheduling exercises at the level of detail
required to correctly answer the exam questions.
    The PMBOK(R) Guide separates the function of Project Time Management into
seven processes: plan schedule management, define activities, sequence activities,

                                                                                61
62    PMP(R) Exam Practice Test and Study Guide


       estimate activity resources, estimate activity durations, develop schedule, and
       control schedule. Review PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, Figure 6-1 before taking the
       practice test. Know this chart thoroughly.
          Following is a list of the major Project Time Management topics. Use it to help
       focus your study efforts on the areas most likely to appear on the exam.
                                       Project Time Management      63


Major Topics
Schedule management plan
Define activities

   Activity list
   Activity attributes
   Milestone list

Sequence activities

   PDM
   Dependencies
   Leads and lags
   Project schedule network diagrams

Estimate activity resources

   Expert judgment
   Alternative analysis
   Published estimating data
   Bottom-up estimating
   Activity resource requirements
   Resource breakdown structure
   Resource calendars

Estimate activity durations

   Expert judgment
   Analogous estimating
   Parametric estimates
   Three-point estimates
   Reserve analysis
   Group decision-making techniques
   Activity duration estimates

Develop schedule

   Schedule network analysis
   Critical path method
   Critical chain method
   Resource optimization techniques
   Leads and lags
   Crashing and fast-tracking
   Project schedule
   Schedule baseline
   Project calendars
64  PMP(R) Exam Practice Test and Study Guide


        Control schedule

           Performance reviews
           Work performance information
           Change requests
           Updates
           Project management plan
           Project documents
                                                             Project Time Management      65


Practice Questions
   INSTRUCTIONS: Note the most suitable answer for each multiple-choice
   question in the appropriate space on the answer sheet.
   Use the following network diagram to answer questions 1 through 4.
   Activity names and duration are provided.


                   A         C           D     E
                   2         4           1     3



                   B                 F                           I
                   6                 1                           2



                                 G                 H
                                 5                 1



 1. What is the duration of the critical path in this network?
   a.   10
   b.   12
   c.   14
   d.   15

 2. What is the float for Activity G?
   a.   -2
   b.   0
   c.   1
   d.   4

 3. If a project planner imposes a finish time of 14 on the project with no
    change in the start date or activity durations, what is the total float of
    Activity E?
   a.   -1
   b.   0
   c.   2
   d.   Cannot be determined
66    PMP(R) Exam Practice Test and Study Guide


         4. If the imposed finish time in question 3 above is removed and reset to 16
            and the duration of Activity H is changed to 3, what is the late finish for
            Activity G?
           a.   -11
           b.   11
           c.   -13
           d.   13

         5. Your company, which operates one of the region's largest chemical process-
            ing plants, has been convicted of illegally dumping toxic substances into the
            local river. The court has mandated that the required cleanup activities be
            completed by February 15. This date is an example of--
           a.   A key event
           b.   A milestone
           c.   A discretionary dependency
           d.   An external dependency

         6. You are managing a construction project for a new city water system. The
            contract requires you to use special titanium piping equipment that is guar-
            anteed not to corrode. The titanium pipe must be resting in the ground a
            total of 10 days before connectors can be installed. In this example, the
            10-day period is defined as--
           a.   Lag
           b.   Lead
           c.   Float
           d.   Slack

         7. Of the following tools and techniques, which one is NOT used for Control
            Schedule?
           a.   Fast tracking
           b.   Trend analysis
           c.   Three-point estimates
           d.   Adjusting leads and lags
                                                             Project Time Management      67


 8. You are planning to conduct the team-building portion of your new proj-
    ect management training curriculum out-of-doors in the local park. You are
    limited to scheduling the course at certain times of the year, and the best
    time for the course to begin is mid-July. One of the more common date con-
    straints to use as you develop the project schedule is--
   a.   "Start no earlier than"
   b.   "Finish no earlier than"
   c.   "Fixed late start"
   d.   "Fixed early finish"

 9. Project schedule development is an iterative process. If the start and finish
    dates are not realistic, the project probably will not finish as planned. You
    are working with your team to define how to manage schedule changes.
    You documented your decisions in which of the following?
   a.   Schedule change control procedures
   b.   Schedule management plan
   c.   Schedule risk plan
   d.   Service-level agreement

10. If, when developing your project schedule, you want to define a distribution
    of probable results for each schedule activity and use that distribution to cal-
    culate another distribution of probable results for the total project, the most
    common technique to use is--
   a.   What-if scenario analysis
   b.   Monte Carlo analysis
   c.   Linear programming
   d.   Concurrent engineering

11. Your lead engineer estimates that a work package will most likely require 50
    weeks to complete. It could be completed in 40 weeks if all goes well, but
    it could take 180 weeks in the worst case. What is the PERT estimate for the
    expected duration of the work package?
   a.   45 weeks
   b.   70 weeks
   c.   90 weeks
   d.   140 weeks
68    PMP(R) Exam Practice Test and Study Guide


        12. Your customer wants the project to be completed six months earlier than
            planned. You believe you can meet this target by overlapping project activi-
            ties. The approach you plan to use is known as--
           a.   Critical chain
           b.   Fast tracking
           c.   Leveling
           d.   Crashing

        13. Activity A has a duration of three days and begins on the morning of
            Monday the 4th. The successor activity, B, has a finish-to-start relationship
            with A. The finish-to-start relationship has three days of lag, and activity B
            has a duration of four days. Sunday is a non-workday. Such data can help to
            determine--
           a.   The total duration of both activities is 8 days
           b.   Calendar time between the start of A to the finish of B is 11 days
           c.   The finish date of B is Wednesday the 13th
           d.   Calendar time between the start of A to the finish of B is 14 days

        14. You can use various estimating approaches to determine activity durations.
            When you have a limited amount of information available about your proj-
            ect, especially when in the early phases, the best approach to use is--
           a.   Bottom-up estimating
           b.   Analogous estimating
           c.   Reserve analysis
           d.   Parametric analysis

        15. "I cannot test the software until I code the software." This expression
            describes which of the following dependencies?
           a.   Internal
           b.   Rational
           c.   Preferential
           d.   Mandatory or hard

        16. Working with your team to provide the basis for measuring and reporting
            schedule progress, you agree to use the--
           a.   Schedule data
           b.   Network diagram
           c.   Project schedule
           d.   Technical baseline
                                                                                  Project Time Management      69


17. Your project schedule was approved. Management has now mandated that
    the project be completed as soon as possible. However, you do not think
    it is possible given resource constraints. In order to convince your manage-
    ment of your need for additional resources, you decide to use--
   a.   Resource manipulation
   b.   Resource breakdown structure
   c.   Critical chain scheduling
   d.   Resource leveling

  18. Review the following network diagram and table. Of the various activi-
      ties, which ones would you crash and in what order?

                                                 B      D
                                                 6      2

                                      A                                 G
                                      4                                 6
                                                 C      E
                                                 2      7

                                                       F
                  Letter = activity                    12
                  Number = duration
                              Time required, weeks            Cost $            Crashing cost
                   Activity   Normal       Crash     Normal            Crash    per weeks, $
                      A          4           2       10,000            14,000       2000
                      B          6           5       30,000            42,500      12,500
                      C          2           1        8000              9500        1500
                      D          2           1       12,000            18,000       6000
                      E          7           5       40,000            52,000       6000
                      F         12           3       20,000            29,000       3000
                      G         6            2        5000             30,000       6000


   a.   A,   C,   E, and F
   b.   A,   B,   D, and F
   c.   A,   B,   E, and F
   d.   C,   A,   F, and G

19. You are remodeling your kitchen and decide to prepare a network dia-
    gram for this project. Your appliances must be purchased and available
    for installation by the time the cabinets are completed. In this example,
    these relationships are--
   a.   Start-to-finish
   b.   Finish-to-start
   c.   Start-to-start
   d.   Finish-to-finish
70    PMP(R) Exam Practice Test and Study Guide


        20. Decomposition is a technique used for both WBS development and activity
            definition. Which following statement best describes the role decomposition
            plays in activity definition as compared to creating the WBS?
            a.   Final output is described in terms of work packages in the WBS
            b.   Final output is described as deliverables or tangible items
            c.   Final output is described as activities
            d.   Decomposition is used the same way in scope definition and activity
                 definition

        21. When sequencing project activities in the schedule, all the following are true
            EXCEPT--
            a. There may be scheduled dates for specific milestones
            b. Every activity is connected to at least one predecessor and at least one
               successor
            c. Lead or lag time may be required
            d. Necessary sequencing of events may be described by the activity
               attributes

        22. A schedule performance index of less than 1.0 indicates that the--
            a. Project is running behind the monetary value of the work it planned to
               accomplish
            b. Earned value physically accomplished thus far is 100%
            c. Project has experienced a permanent loss of time
            d. Project may not be on schedule, but the project manager need not be
               concerned

        23. Various tools and techniques are available to sequence activities, and sev-
            eral factors can help to determine which tool or technique to select. When a
            project manager decides to include sub-networks or a fragment network as
            part of his or her scheduling technique, what does this decision say about
            the project?
            a. The work is unique requiring special network diagrams at various stages.
            b. Software that manages resources is available over an existing electronic
               network.
            c. Several identical or nearly identical series of activities are repeated
               throughout the project.
            d. Multiple critical paths exist in the project.
                                                           Project Time Management      71


24. To meet regulatory requirements, you need to crash your project schedule.
    Your first step is to compute--
   a. The cost and time slope for each critical activity that can be expedited
   b. The cost of additional resources to be added to the project's critical path
   c. The time saved in the overall schedule when tasks are expedited on the
      critical path
   d. Three probabilistic time estimates of PERT for each critical path activity

25. Which one of the following is a key input to the Define Activities process?
   a.   Project   management plan
   b.   Project   scope statement
   c.   Project   scope baseline
   d.   Project   charter

26. Unlike bar charts, milestone charts show--
   a. Scheduled start or completion of major deliverables and key external
      interfaces
   b. Activity start and end dates of critical tasks
   c. Expected durations of the critical path
   d. Dependencies between complementary projects

27. Project managers should pay attention to critical and subcritical activities
    when evaluating project time performance. One way to do this is to analyze
    10 subcritical paths in order of ascending float. This approach is part of--
   a.   Variance analysis
   b.   Simulation
   c.   Earned value management
   d.   Trend analysis

28. An activity has an early start date of the 10th and a late start date of the
    19th. The activity has a duration of four days. There are no non-workdays.
    From the information given, what can be concluded about the activity?
   a.   Total float for the activity is nine days.
   b.   The early finish date of the activity is the end of the day on the 14th.
   c.   The late finish date is the 25th.
   d.   The activity can be completed in two days if the resources devoted to it
        are doubled.
72      PMP(R) Exam Practice Test and Study Guide


          29. In project development, schedule information, such as who will perform the
              work, where the work will be performed, activity type, and WBS classifica-
              tion, are examples of--
             a.   Activity attributes
             b.   Constraints
             c.   Data in the WBS repository
             d.   Refinements

          30. Which of the following is a key benefit of Control Schedule?
             a.   It   updates schedule progress
             b.   It   minimizes risk
             c.   It   reprioritizes remaining work as required
             d.   It   describes how the schedule will be managed and controlled

          31. It is important to use the critical path analysis in Control Schedule
              because--
             a. It assists in reviewing scenarios to bring the schedule in line with the
                plan
             b. It enables a consideration of the resource availability and the project time
             c. It examines project performance over time
             d. It can help identify schedule risks

          32. Several types of float are found in project networks. Float that is used by a
              particular activity and does NOT affect the float in later activities is called--
             a.   Extra float
             b.   Free float
             c.   Total float
             d.   Expected float

          33. All the following statements regarding critical chain method are true
              EXCEPT--
             a.   It modifies the schedule to account for limited resources
             b.   The first step is to use conservative estimates for activity durations
             c.   Duration buffers are added on the critical path
             d.   It focuses on managing buffer activity durations
                                                            Project Time Management      73


34. You are managing a new technology project designed to improve the
    removal of hazardous waste from your city. You are in the planning
    phase of this project and have prepared your network diagram. Your
    next step is to--
   a.   Describe any unusual sequencing in the network
   b.   State the number resources required to complete each activity
   c.   Establish a project calendar and link it to individual resource calendars
   d.   Determine which schedule compression technique is the most appropri-
        ate, because your customer requests that the project be completed as
        soon as possible

35. The risk register may need to be updated as an output of which following
    process?
   a.   Define Activities
   b.   Sequence Activities
   c.   Estimate Activity Resources
   d.   Control Schedule

36. You are managing a project that will use a virtual team with team members
    on three different continents. Your company is looking to use the virtual
    team to provide a lower cost product by using resources in countries that
    have a favorable exchange rate to that of your country. To assist in this pro-
    cess as you estimate resource requirements, it is helpful to consider--
   a.   Bottom-up estimating
   b.   Published estimating data
   c.   Analogous estimating
   d.   Reserve analysis

37. Activity A has a pessimistic (P) estimate of 36 days, a most likely (ML) esti-
    mate of 21 days, and an optimistic (O) estimate of 6 days. What is the prob-
    ability that activity A will be completed in 16 to 26 days?
   a.   55.70 percent
   b.   68.26 percent
   c.   95.46 percent
   d.   99.73 percent
74      PMP(R) Exam Practice Test and Study Guide


          38. You are managing a project to redesign a retail store layout to improve cus-
              tomer throughput and efficiency. Much project work must be done on site
              and will require the active participation of store employees who are life-long
              members of a powerful union with a reputation for labor unrest. One impor-
              tant component of your schedule must be--
              a.   A resource capabilities matrix
              b.   Buffers and reserves
              c.   A resource calendar
              d.   A resource histogram

          39. To account for uncertainty in a schedule, reserve analysis may be used. All
              the following are examples of contingency reserves EXCEPT--
              a.   Fixed number of work periods
              b.   Percent of the estimated activity duration
              c.   Buffers
              d.   Productivity metrics

          40. The reason that the schedule performance index (SPI) is shown as a ratio
              is to--
              a. Enable a detailed analysis of the schedule regardless of the value of the
                 schedule variance
              b. Distinguish between critical path and noncritical path work packages
              c. Provide the ability to show performance for a specified time period for
                 trend analysis
              d. Measure the actual time to complete the project
                                             Project Time Management      75


Answer Sheet

1.    a   b    c   d   21.   a   b   c   d

2.    a   b    c   d   22.   a   b   c   d

3.    a   b    c   d   23.   a   b   c   d

4.    a   b    c   d   24.   a   b   c   d

5.    a   b    c   d   25.   a   b   c   d

6.    a   b    c   d   26.   a   b   c   d

7.    a   b    c   d   27.   a   b   c   d

8.    a   b    c   d   28.   a   b   c   d

9.    a   b    c   d   29.   a   b   c   d

10.   a   b    c   d   30.   a   b   c   d

11.   a   b    c   d   31.   a   b   c   d

12.   a   b    c   d   32.   a   b   c   d

13.   a   b    c   d   33.   a   b   c   d

14.   a   b    c   d   34.   a   b   c   d

15.   a   b    c   d   35.   a   b   c   d

16.   a   b    c   d   36.   a   b   c   d

17.   a   b    c   d   37.   a   b   c   d

18.   a   b    c   d   38.   a   b   c   d

19.   a   b    c   d   39.   a   b   c   d

20.   a   b    c   d   40.   a   b   c   d
                                                            Project Time Management        77


Answer Key
 1. d. 15
       The total duration for the path B-C-D-E-I is 15. The duration of any
       other path in the network is less than 15. You calculate the critical path
       in this question through the critical path method. You are doing so to
       estimate the minimum project duration and the amount of schedule
       flexibility in the network paths. To do so, determine the early start,
       early finish, late start, and late finish for all the activities by performing
       a forward and backward pass. The critical path represents the longest
       path in the network, which determines the shortest possible project
       duration. The early and late start and finish dates are not the schedule
       but show the time period when the activity could be executed. The
       critical path method calculates the amount of scheduling flexibility on
       logical network paths. The critical path method normally is one that has
       zero total float on the critical path; note the word "normally". Activities
       on the critical path are critical path activities. Review the example in
       Figure 6-18 in the PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013. [Planning]
       PMI(R), PMBOK(R)Guide, 2013, 176-177
       PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Planning, 6, Task 4
78  PMP(R) Exam Practice Test and Study Guide


          2. c. 1
                           Float = (late finish - early finish) or
                                   (late start - early start)                  ES    EF
                           Activity G     LF = 12 (12 - 11) = (1)
                                          EF = 11                     Legend
                                          LS = 7 (7 - 6) = (1)
                                          ES = 6
                                                                               LS    LF

                           0       2    6    10        10 11         10 13
                               A            C              D           E
                               2            4              1           3
                           4       6    6    10        10 11         10 13
                           0       6              6      7                            13 15
                               B                       F                                 I
                               6                       1                                 2
                           0       6              11 12                               13 15
                                            6     11                   11 12
                                             G                             H
                                              5                            1
                                            7 12                       12 13
                                                                                    [Planning]


                 Float is often called slack. The critical path activities have zero float.
                 Positive total float is caused if the backward path is calculated from a
                 schedule constraint that is later than the early finish date calculated by
                 the forward path. Negative total float is caused if a constraint on the late
                 date is violated by duration and logic. Once the total float for a network
                 path has been calculated then the free float, or the amount of time an
                 activity can be delayed without delaying the early start of a successor or
                 violating a schedule constraint, can be determined. Figure 6-18 in the
                 PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013 shows the total float in the example.
                 PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 177
                 PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Planning, 6, Task 4
                                                                                                        Project Time Management      79


3. a. -1
      The imposed finish date becomes the late finish for Activity I. The late
      dates for each activity need to be recalculated. The dates for Activity E
      become--
                   ES = 10
                   EF = 13
                   LS = 9
                   LF = 12
              Total float = LS - ES or 9 - 10 = (-1) or
                            LS - EF or 12 - 13 = (-1)

              0         2           6       10               10 11            10 13
                   A                    C                            D            E
                   2                    4                            1            3
              3         5           5       9                9           10   9   12
              0         6                            6           7                              13 15
                   B                                      F                                        I
                   6                                      1                                        2
              -1           5                     10 11                                          12 14
                                                                                                        Imposed
                                        6        11                               11 12                 finish
                                             G                                        H                 time
                                             5                                        1
                                        6        11                               11 12
                                                                                               [Planning]


      PMI(R), PMBOK(R)Guide, 2013, 177
      PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Planning, 6, Task 4

4. b. 11
      The late dates for all activities need to be recalculated given the
      changed duration. Activity G's revised late dates are--
                    LF = 11
                    LS = 6

                    0           2       6            10              10 11        10 13
                            A                    C                        D            E
                            2                    4                        1            3
                    5           7       7            11              11 12        11 14
                    0           6                             6        7                            14 16
                            B                                        F                                 I
                            6                                        1                                 2
                       0        6                            10 11                                  14 16
                                                 6           11                        11 14
                                                         G                                 H
                                                         5                                 3
                                                 6           11                        11 14
                                                                                                  [Planning]


      PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 177
      PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Planning, 6, Task 4
80    PMP(R) Exam Practice Test and Study Guide


         5. b. A milestone
                 A milestone is a significant point or event in the project. Milestones may
                 be required by the project sponsor, customer, or other external factors,
                 such as those required by contract, for the completion of certain deliv-
                 erables. They are similar to schedule activities, with the same structure
                 and objectives, but they have zero duration as they represent a moment
                 in time. A milestone list is an output of Define Activities. [Planning]
                 PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 153
                 PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Planning, 6, Task 4

         6. a. Lag
                 For example, in a finish-to-start dependency with a 20-day lag, the
                 successor activity cannot start until 20 days after the predecessor has
                 finished. A lag is the amount of time that a successor activity will be
                 delayed with respect to a predecessor activity. The project management
                 team determines those dependencies that may require a lead or a lag
                 to best define the logical relationship. Keep in mind that leads (i.e., the
                 amount of time a successor activity can be advanced with respect to
                 a predecessor activity) and lags should not replace schedule logic, and
                 their use should be documented. Review Figure 6-10 in the PMBOK(R)
                 Guide, 2013 for examples of a lead and a lag. [Planning]
                 PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 158-159
                 PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Planning, 6, Task 4

         7. c. Three-point estimates
                 Three-point estimates are used to determine the estimates that go into
                 the schedule using the Program Evaluation and Review Technique
                 (PERT) to better improve the accuracy of activity duration estimating.
                 PERT calculates the most likely, optimistic, and pessimistic estimate.
                 In Schedule Control, tools and techniques are performance reviews
                 (including trend analysis or answer b), project management software,
                 resource optimization techniques, modeling techniques, leads and lags
                 (answer d), schedule compression (answer a), and a scheduling tool.
                 [Planning and Monitoring and Controlling]
                 PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 170-171, 188-190
                 PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Monitoring and
                 Controlling, 9, Task 2
                 PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Planning, 5, Task 4
                                                           Project Time Management       81


8. a. "Start no earlier than"
       Imposed dates on schedule activity starts of finishes can be used to
       restrict the start of finish to occur either no earlier than a specified
       date or no later than a specified date. Although all four date constraints
       typically are available in project management software, "start no earlier
       than" and "finish no later than" constraints are more commonly used. In
       this question given the date constraint of mid-July, start no earlier than
       is the best answer. [Planning]
       PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 543
       PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Planning, 6, Task 4

 9. b. Schedule management plan
       The schedule management plan is part of the overall project manage-
       ment plan. Whether it is formal, informal, highly detailed, or broadly
       framed, it generally is based on specific project needs. It is the out-
       put of the Plan Schedule Management process and its typical contents
       include: project schedule model development, level of accuracy, units of
       measure, organizational procedure links, project schedule model main-
       tenance, control thresholds, rules of performance measurement, report-
       ing formats, and process descriptions. Study these contents since this
       plan establishes the criteria and activities for developing, monitoring,
       and controlling the schedule. [Planning]
       PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 148-149
       PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Planning, 6, Task 4

10. b. Monte Carlo analysis
       Simulation, a modeling technique in Develop Schedule, involves calcu-
       lating multiple project durations with different sets of activity assump-
       tions using probability distributions constructed from three-point
       estimates or PERT to account for uncertainty. Monte Carlo analysis is the
       most commonly used simulation technique. In it, a distribution of possi-
       ble activity durations is defined for each activity and is used to calculate
       a distribution of possible outcomes for the total project. What-if scenario
       analysis is another modeling technique. [Planning]
       PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 180
       PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Planning, 6, Task 4
82    PMP(R) Exam Practice Test and Study Guide


          11. b. 70 weeks

                                   Optimistic + (4 x Most likely) + Pessimistic
                            E(t) =
                                                        6
                                   40 + 200 + 180 420
                                 =                 =      = 70 weeks
                                         6            6

                   As discussed earlier, use of the three-time estimates (i.e., optimistic,
                   most likely, and pessimistic) improves the accuracy of a single point
                   estimate. [Planning]
                   PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 170-171
                   PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Planning, 6, Task 4

          12. b. Fast tracking
                   Fast tracking is a way to accelerate the project schedule. It is a schedule
                   compression tool in the Develop Schedule process in which activities
                   or phases normally done in sequence are performed in parallel for part
                   of their duration. However, it may result in rework and increased risk.
                   Consider it for activities that can be overlapped to shorten the project
                   schedule. Crashing is another compression technique. In the Control
                   Schedule process, it is a tool and technique used to find ways to bring
                   project activities that are behind into alignment with the schedule man-
                   agement plan. [Planning and Monitoring and Controlling]
                   PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 181, 190, 540
                   PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Planning, 6, Task 4
                   PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Monitoring and
                   Controlling, 9, Task 1

          13. b. Calendar time between the start of A to the finish of B is 11 days
                   The duration of A, which is three, is added to the duration of B, which
                   is four, for a total of seven. The three days between the activities is
                   lag and not duration. The lag is a constraint and must be taken into
                   account as part of the network calculations, but it does not consume
                   resources. The total time by the calendar is 11 days as counted from the
                   morning of Monday the 4th. The lag occurs over Thursday, Friday, and
                   Saturday. Sunday is a non-work day, so activity B does not start until
                   Monday the 11th. Therefore, the calendar time is 11 days, and activity
                   B ends on Thursday the 14th. In the Sequence Activities and Develop
                   Schedule processes, leads and lags are a tool and technique. [Planning]
                   PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 158-159, and 180
                   PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Planning, 6, Task 4
                                                           Project Time Management      83


14. b. Analogous estimating
       Although limitations exist with all estimating approach, analogous
       estimating is often used when there is a limited amount of information
       for the project. It uses historical information from a similar activity or
       a project. It uses parameters from a previous but similar project such
       as duration, budget, size, weight, and complexity to estimate the same
       parameter or measure for a future project. It is considered a gross value
       estimating approach, which often is adjusted for known differences in
       project complexity It is a tool and technique in the Estimate Activity
       Durations process. [Planning]
       PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 169
       PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Planning, 6, Task 4

15. d. Mandatory or hard
       Mandatory dependencies may be required contractually or may be
       inherent in the nature of the project work. They describe a relationship
       in which the successor activity cannot be started because of physical
       constraints until the predecessor activity has been finished. For exam-
       ple, software cannot be tested until it has been developed (or coded).
       They may be called hard logic or hard dependencies; however, techni-
       cal dependencies may not be mandatory. This distinction is important
       to remember as it could be a possible test question. The project team
       determines the dependencies that are mandatory as it sequences the
       activities; it then is part of dependency determination, a tool and tech-
       nique in the Sequence Activities process. Dependency has four attri-
       butes but only two are applied at the same time: mandatory external
       dependencies, mandatory internal dependencies, discretionary external
       dependencies, or discretionary internal dependencies. They should not
       be confused with assigning schedule constraints in the scheduling tool.
       [Planning]
       PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 157
       PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Planning, 6, Task 4

16. c. Project schedule
       The approved project schedule is a key input to the Control Schedule
       process. It refers to the most recent version with any notes to indicate
       updates, completed activities, and started activities as of the indicated
       data date. [Monitoring and Controlling]
       PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 182, 187
       PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Monitoring and
       Controlling, 9, Task 2
84      PMP(R) Exam Practice Test and Study Guide


          17. d. Resource leveling
                   While resource leveling will often result in a project duration that is longer
                   than the preliminary schedule as the original critical path probably will
                   change and increase, it can also be used to get a schedule back on track
                   by reassigning activities from noncritical to critical path activities. It is a
                   resource optimization technique in the Develop Schedule process. Start
                   and finish dates are adjusted based on resource constraints, and the goal is
                   to balance demand with the available supply of resources. It is used when
                   scarce or critically required resources are only available at certain times
                   or in limited quantities or are over allocated if the resource is assigned to
                   two activities at the same time, or to keep resource use at a constant level.
                   Refer to Figure 6-20 in the PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013 for an example. Resource
                   smoothing is the other resource optimization technique. [Planning]
                   PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 179-180
                   PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Planning, 6, Task 4

          18. d. C, A, F, and G
                   First, it is necessary to determine the critical path, which is A, C, F, and
                   G. To determine the lowest weekly crashing cost, start with C at $1,500
                   per week. The next activity is A, followed by F and G. Understand how
                   to crash a schedule in case you have a question on it in your exam.
                   Along with fast tracking, it is a schedule compression technique in the
                   Develop Schedule process. The purpose is to shorten the schedule for
                   the least incremental cost by adding resources. Examples are to approve
                   overtime, add additional resources, or pay to expedite delivery of activi-
                   ties on the critical path. It only works for activities on the critical path
                   and does not always provide a viable alternative. The latter means it can
                   result in increased risk and/or cost. Refer to Kerzner, 2013, pages 620-
                   623, for a detailed example of crashing. [Planning]
                   PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 181
                   Kerzner, H., Project Management: A Systems Approach to Planning,
                   Scheduling, and Controlling, 2013, 620-623
                   PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Planning, 6, Task 4

          19. d. Finish-to-finish
                   The completion of the work of the successor activity depends upon
                   the completion of the work of the predecessor activity. It is a tool and
                   technique in the precedence diagramming method in the Sequence
                   Activities process in which there are four types of dependencies or logi-
                   cal relationships as listed in the answers to this question. [Planning]
                   PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 156
                   PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Planning, 6, Task 4
                                                             Project Time Management       85


20. c. Final output is described as activities.
        In the Create WBS process, the work package is defined as the low-
        est level of the WBS to then estimate and manage cost and duration.
        In the Define Activities process, final output is described as activities. It
        is a tool and technique in both processes as it divides and subdivides
        the project scope and deliverables into smaller, more manageable parts.
        Activities represent the effort to create the work package in Create WBS.
        [Planning]
        PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 151
        PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Planning, 6, Task 4

21. b. Every activity is connected to at least one predecessor and at least one
       successor
        The Activity Sequence process involves identifying and document-
        ing relationships among the project activities. However, every activity
        or milestone is not connected to at least one predecessor or successor
        except the first and last. Logical relationships are set up to create a real-
        istic project schedule. Some leads and lags may be used. [Planning]
        PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 156-157
        PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Planning, 6, Task 4

22. a. Project is running behind the monetary value of the work it planned to
       accomplish
        The SPI represents how much of the originally scheduled work has
        been accomplished at a given period in time, thus providing the proj-
        ect team with insight as to whether the project is on schedule. It is a
        measure of schedule efficiency and is calculated by EV/PV. A SPI of
        1 means the project is on schedule, and the work that has been done
        to date is exactly the same as the work that was planned. Other val-
        ues show how much costs are over or under (as in this example).
        [Monitoring and Controlling]
        PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 189, 224
        PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Monitoring and
        Controlling, 9, Task 1
86      PMP(R) Exam Practice Test and Study Guide


          23. c. Several identical or nearly identical series of activities are repeated
                 throughout the project.
                   When identical network descriptions are repeated throughout a proj-
                   ect, templates of those activities can be developed. If those series of
                   tasks are repeated several times, the template can be updated several
                   times. Software can be used with the templates to facilitate document-
                   ing and adapting them for future use. The sub-network or fragment
                   tends to represent a sub-project or a work package and is often used to
                   illustrate or study some potential or proposed schedule condition, such
                   as a change in preferential schedule logic or the scope of the project.
                   [Planning]
                   PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 564
                   PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Planning, 6, Task 4

          24. a. The cost and time slope for each critical activity that can be expedited
                   Slope = (Crash cost - Normal cost)/(Crash time - Normal time). This
                   calculation shows the cost per day of crashing the project. The slope
                   is negative to indicate that as the time required for a project or task
                   decreases, the cost increases. If the costs and times are the same
                   regardless of whether they are crashed or normal, the activity cannot be
                   expedited. [Planning]
                   PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 181
                   Kerzner, H., Project Management: A Systems Approach to Planning,
                   Scheduling, and Controlling, 2013, 620-623
                   PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Planning, 6, Task 4

          25. c. Project scope baseline
                   The scope baseline--made up of the scope statement, WBS, and WBS
                   dictionary--is a key input to the Define Activities process and is used to
                   develop the activity list that subsequently will help to create the sched-
                   ule. Other inputs in this process are the schedule management plan,
                   enterprise environmental factors (i.e., organization culture and structure,
                   published information from commercial data bases, and the PMIS), and
                   organizational process assets (lessons learned knowledge bases, stan-
                   dardized processes, templates with a standard activity list or a portion
                   of one, and activity planning-related processes, procedures, and guide-
                   lines). [Planning]
                   PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 151
                   PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Planning, 6, Task 4
                                                              Project Time Management       87


26. a. Scheduled start or completion of major deliverables and key external
       interfaces
        Milestones are singular points in time, such as the start or completion of
        a significant activity or group of activities. Milestone charts are an out-
        put of the Develop Schedule process, and while they are similar to bar
        charts, their focus is only on the answer to this question. [Planning]
        PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 182
        PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Planning, 6, Task 4

27. a. Variance analysis
        Performance of variance analysis during the Control Schedule process is
        a key element of schedule control. Float variance is an essential plan-
        ning component for evaluating project time performance. For those
        projects not using earned value, variance analysis can be performed by
        comparing the planned activity start or finish dates to actuals to iden-
        tify variances between the schedule baseline and actual project perfor-
        mance. Then, future analysis can be done to determine the cause and
        degree of variance relative to the schedule baseline and needed correc-
        tive or preventive actions. In earned value analysis, the total float and
        early finish variances are essential planning components to determine
        the cause and degree of variance relative to the schedule baseline as
        part of schedule control, [Monitoring and Controlling]
        PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 189
        PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Monitoring and
        Controlling 9, Task 1

28. a. Total float for the activity is nine days.
        Total float or slack is computed by subtracting the early start date from
        the late start date, or 19 - 10 = 9. To compute the early finish date given
        a duration of 4, we would start counting the activity on the morning of
        the 10th; therefore, the activity would be completed at the end of day
        13, not 14 (10, 11, 12, 13). If we started the activity on its late start date
        on the morning of the 19th, we would finish at the end of day 22, not
        25. Insufficient information is provided to determine whether this activ-
        ity can be completed in 2 days if the resources are doubled. [Planning]
        Meredith, J.R. and Mantel, Jr., S.J., Project Management: A Managerial
        Approach, 2012, 352-353
        PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 177
        PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Planning, 6, Task 4
88    PMP(R) Exam Practice Test and Study Guide


          29. a. Activity attributes
                  Identifying activity attributes is helpful for further selection and sorting
                  of planned activities. They are used for schedule development and for
                  report formatting purposes and are an output of the Define Activity pro-
                  cess. They are not milestones as they have durations when work of the
                  activity is being done and may have costs based on needed resources.
                  Therefore, they extend the description of the activity as they identify its
                  multiple components, which evolve over time. Components in the early
                  stages of a project include the activity identifier, the WBS identifier, and
                  the activity name. When completed, these components may have activity
                  codes, descriptions, predecessor and successor activities, logical relation-
                  ships, leads and lags, resource requirements, imposed dates, constraints,
                  and assumptions. They can be used to identify the person responsible
                  for doing the work, geographic area or place where the work is done,
                  the project calendar assigned to the activity, and the activity type (i.e.,
                  level of effort, discrete effort, and apportioned effort). [Planning]
                  PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 153
                  PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Planning, 6, Task 4

          30. b. It minimizes risk
                  In Control Schedule the key benefit is that it provides the means to
                  recognize deviations from the schedule management plan and take
                  as required corrective and preventive action, which minimize risk.
                  [Monitoring and Controlling]
                  PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 185
                  PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Monitoring and
                  Controlling, 9, Task 4

          31. d. It can help identify schedule risks
                  In Control Schedule, performance reviews are a tool and technique
                  to measure, update, and analyze schedule performance. Various tech-
                  niques, such as trend analysis, the critical path method, the critical
                  chain method, and earned value management, are used. The critical
                  path method compares progress along the critical path to help deter-
                  mine schedule status. The variance on the critical path is important as
                  it can have a direct impact on the project's end date. Also by evaluating
                  the progress of activities on near critical paths, one can identify sched-
                  ule risk. [Monitoring and Controlling]
                  PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 188
                  PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Monitoring and
                  Controlling, 9, Task 1
                                                             Project Time Management       89


32. b. Free float
        Free float is defined as the amount of time an activity can be delayed
        without delaying the early start of any immediately succeeding activities
        or violating a schedule constraint. [Planning]
        PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 177
        PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Planning, 6, Task 4

33. b. The first step is to use conservative estimates for activity durations
        When using critical chain techniques, the initial project schedule is
        developed from the critical path method and considers the effects of
        resource allocation, resource optimization, resource leveling, and activ-
        ity duration estimating on the critical path. The durations do not include
        safety margins, logical relationships, and resource availability with statis-
        tically determined buffers of the aggregated safety margins at specified
        points on the project schedule path to account for limited resources and
        uncertainties in the project. The critical chain method allows a project
        team to place buffers on any project schedule path considering these
        resource limitations and project uncertainties. Review the example on
        page 178 in the PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013. [Planning]
        PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 178
        PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Planning, 6, Task 4

34. a. Describe any unusual sequencing in the network
        A summary narrative can accompany the schedule network diagram
        and describe the basic approach used to sequence the activities in the
        network. This narrative also should describe any unusual sequences in
        the network. The project schedule network diagrams are an output of
        the Sequence Activities process. The project schedule network diagram
        is a graphic representation of the logical relationships or dependencies
        among the project schedule activities. Review Figure 6-11 on page 160
        of the PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013 as an example. [Planning]
        PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 159-160
        PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Planning, 6, Task 4
90      PMP(R) Exam Practice Test and Study Guide


          35. b. Sequence Activities
                   The risk register may require updates in both the Sequence Activities
                   and Develop Schedule processes. In the Sequence Activity process, the
                   activity lists, activity attributes, and milestone list may need updates as
                   well. In the Develop Schedule process the risk register may be updated
                   to reflect any opportunities or threats from scheduling assumptions.
                   [Planning]
                   PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 160, 185
                   PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Planning, 4, Task 10

          36. b. Published estimating data
                   In estimating activity resources, published estimating data is a tool and
                   technique that is used as many companies routinely publish updated
                   production rates and unit costs of resources. This includes labor, mate-
                   rial, and equipment for different countries and geographic locations in
                   these countries. [Planning]
                   PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 164
                   PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Planning, 6, Task 4

          37. b. 68.26 percent
                   First, compute the standard deviation:
                            P-O          36 - 6
                       =            or          = 5 days
                             6             6

                   Next, compute PERT expected time:
                        P + 4(ML) + O         36 + 4(21) + 6
                                         or                  = 21 days
                              6                     6

                   Finally, determine range of outcomes using 1:

                   21-5 = 16 days, and 21 + 5 = 26 days

                   Simply defined, 1 is the amount on either side of the mean of a nor-
                   mal distribution that will contain approximately 68.26 percent of the
                   population. Duration estimates based on PERT with an assumed dis-
                   tribution provide an expected duration and clarify the range of uncer-
                   tainty around the expected duration. [Planning]
                   Meredith, J.R. and Mantel, Jr., S.J., Project Management: A Managerial
                   Approach, 2012, 348-350
                   PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 170-171
                   PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Planning, 6, Task 4
                                                           Project Time Management      91


38. c. A resource calendar
       Project and resource calendars identify periods when work is allowed.
       Project calendars affect all resources. Resource calendars affect a spe-
       cific resource or a resource category, such as a labor contract that
       requires certain workers to work on certain days of the week. The
       resource calendar identifies the working days and shifts that each
       specific resource is available and is used to estimate resource use.
       The resource calendars specify when and how long identified project
       resources are available during the project, and this information may
       be at the activity or project level. This knowledge includes consider-
       ations of resource experience, skill level, or both, as well as, where
       the resources are located and when they may be available. Resource
       calendars are an input to Estimate Activity Resources. Project calen-
       dars are an output of Develop Schedule and identify working days and
       shifts available for the scheduled activities. They distinguish time peri-
       ods in days or parts of days available to complete scheduled activities
       from time periods that are not available. Project calendars may require
       updates. [Planning]
       PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 163, 184, 558
       PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Planning, 6, Task 4

39. d. Productivity metrics
       Duration estimates may include contingency reserves, and contingency
       should be identified clearly in schedule documentation. They are built
       into the overall project schedule to account for uncertainty. They also
       may be developed using such quantitative analysis methods such as
       Monte Carlo simulation. When more information is known about the
       project, the contingency reserve may be used, reduced, or eliminated.
       They are part of reserve analysis, a tool and technique in the Estimate
       Activity Durations process. [Planning]
       PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 171
       PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Planning, 6, Task 4
92    PMP(R) Exam Practice Test and Study Guide


        40. c. Provide the ability to show performance for a specified time period for
               trend analysis
                 Because the schedule performance index (SPI) and the cost perfor-
                 mance index (CPI) are expressed as ratios, they can be used to show
                 performance for a specific time period or trends over a long-time hori-
                 zon. The SPI measures schedule efficiency as EV/PV and measures how
                 efficiently the project team is using its time If it is less than 1, less work
                 was completed than planned; greater than 1 shows more work was
                 completed than was planned. It is important to also analyze perfor-
                 mance on the critical path to determine if the project will finish ahead
                 of or behind finish dates. [Monitoring and Controlling]
                 PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 190, 219, 224
                 PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Monitoring and
                 Controlling, 9, Task 1
Project Cost Management


Study Hints
You do not need to be a certified public accountant to successfully answer
the Project Cost Management questions on the PMP(R) certification exam. PMI(R)
addresses cost management from a project manager's perspective, which is much
more general than that of an accountant. However, these questions are not easy.
Far from it! Exam takers find the Project Cost Management questions more dif-
ficult than most of the others because they address such a broad range of cost
issues (for example, cost estimating, earned value, and creating and interpreting
S-curves) and require a significant amount of study time.
   You may find questions relating to contract cost management. Because cost
considerations are heavily affected by contract type, and Project Procurement
Management is one of the ten PMBOK(R) Guide areas on which you will be tested,
time spent studying that area will help to prepare you for the cost questions on
the exam and vice versa.
   The exam may include several questions that require you to know and solve
specific, albeit simple, formulas. You must have a thorough knowledge of earned
value--what it is and how it is computed. Study Table 7-1 in the PMBOK(R) Guide,
2013 as it provides information on the formulas, how to calculate them, and how
to interpret the results.
   For additional information on project estimating, you may wish to review
PMI(R)'s Practice Standard for Project Estimating, 2011. For additional information
on earned value analysis from a PMI(R) perspective, you may also wish to consult
PMI(R)'s Practice Standard for Earned Value Management, Second Edition, 2011.
   PMI(R) views Project Cost Management as a four-step process comprising Plan
Cost Management, Estimate Costs, Determine Budges, and Control Costs. See
PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013 Figure 7-1 for an overview of this structure. Know this
chart thoroughly.




                                                                                93
94      PMP(R) Exam Practice Test and Study Guide


            Important: PMI(R) allows the use of standard six-function (+, -, x, /, ,%) busi-
         ness calculators. These calculators are provided at the exam site for your use
         during the exam.
            Following is a list of the major Project Cost Management topics. Use it to help
         focus your study efforts on the areas most likely to appear on the exam.
                                    Project Cost Management    95


Major Topics
Project cost management
Life-cycle cost (LCC)
Cost management plan
Estimate costs

   Scope baseline
   Human resource plan
   Project schedule
   Risk register
   Cost estimating methods
   Analogous estimating
   Parametric modeling
   Bottom-up estimating
   Three-point estimates
   Vendor bid analysis
   Reserve analysis
   Cost of quality
   Accuracy of estimates
   Order of magnitude
   Budget
   Definitive
   Direct versus indirect costs
   Contingency/management reserve
   Activity cost estimates
   Basis of estimates

Cost risk and contract type
Determine budgets

   Cost aggregation
   Reserve analysis
   Funding limit reconciliation

Cost baseline
Control costs

   Performance reviews
   Variance analysis
   Forecasting
96  PMP(R) Exam Practice Test and Study Guide


        Earned value management (EVM)
        The most rudimentary building blocks

           Cost variance (CV)
           Schedule variance (SV)
           Cost performance index (CPI)
           Forecasting
           Schedule performance index (SPI)
           Budget at completion (BAC)
           Variance at completion (VAC)
           Estimate to complete (ETC)
           Estimate at completion (EAC)
           To-complete performance index (TCPI)

        Earned value measurement techniques

           Weighted milestones
           Fixed formula
           Percent complete

        Work performance measurements
                                                               Project Cost Management    97


Practice Questions
   INSTRUCTIONS: Note the most suitable answer for each multiple-choice
   question in the appropriate space on the answer sheet.
   You are using earned value progress reporting for your current project
   in an effort to teach your software developers the benefits of earned
   value. You plan to display project results on the cafeteria bulletin board
   so that the team knows how the project is progressing. Use the current
   status, listed below, to answer questions 1 through 4:
         PV= $2,200
         EV= $2,000
         AC= $2,500
         BAC = $10,000

 1. According to earned value analysis, the SV and status of the project
    described above is--
   a.   -$300; the project is ahead of schedule
   b.   +$8,000; the project is on schedule
   c.   +$200; the project is ahead of schedule
   d.   -$200; the project is behind schedule

 2. What is the CPI for this project, and what does it tell us about cost perfor-
    mance thus far?
   a.   0.20; actual costs are exactly as planned
   b.   0.80; actual costs have exceeded planned costs
   c.   0.80; actual costs are less than planned costs
   d.   1.25; actual costs have exceeded planned costs

 3. The CV for this project is--
   a.   300
   b.   -$300
   c.   500
   d.   -$500

 4. What is the EAC for this project, and what does it represent?
a.      $12,500; the revised estimate for total project cost
        (based on performance thus far)
b.      $10,000; the revised estimate for total project cost
        (based on performance thus far)
c.      $12,500; the original project budget
d.      $10,000; the original project budget
98      PMP(R) Exam Practice Test and Study Guide


           5. You have now prepared your cost management plan so now you are prepar-
              ing your project's cost estimate. You decided to use analogous estimating.
              Which of the following is NOT a characteristic of analogous estimating?
             a.   Supports top-down estimating
             b.   Is a form of expert judgment
             c.   Has an accuracy rate of 10% of actual costs
             d.   Involves using the cost of a previous, similar project as the basis for esti-
                  mating current project cost

           6. All the following are outputs of the Estimate Costs process EXCEPT--
             a.   Activity cost estimates
             b.   Basis of estimates
             c.   Documented constraints
             d.   Cost baseline

           7. You must consider direct costs, indirect costs, overhead costs, and general
              and administrative costs during cost estimating. Which of the following is
              NOT an example of a direct cost?
             a.   Salary of the project manager
             b.   Subcontractor expenses
             c.   Materials used by the project
             d.   Electricity

           8. If the cost variance is the same as the schedule variance and both numbers
              are greater than zero, then--
             a.   The cost variance is due to the schedule variance
             b.   The variance is favorable to the project
             c.   The schedule variance can be easily corrected
             d.   Labor rates have escalated since the project began

           9. You are responsible for preparing a cost estimate for a large World Bank
              project. You decide to prepare a bottom-up estimate because your estimate
              needs to be as accurate as possible. Your first step is to--
             a. Locate a computerized tool to assist in the process
             b. Use the cost estimate from a previous project to help you prepare this
                estimate
             c. Identify and estimate the cost for each work package or activity
             d. Consult with subject matter experts and use their suggestions as the basis
                for your estimate
                                                           Project Cost Management    99


10. Management has grown weary of the many surprises, mostly negative, that
    occur on your projects. In an effort to provide stakeholders with an effective
    performance metric, you will use the to-complete performance index (TCPI).
    Its purpose is to--
   a. Determine the schedule and cost performance needed to complete the
      remaining work within management's financial goal for the project
   b. Determine the cost performance needed to complete the remaining work
      within management's financial goal for the project
   c. Predict final project costs
   d. Predict final project schedule and costs

11. If operations on a work package were estimated to cost $1,500 and finish
    today but, instead, have cost $1,350 and are only two-thirds complete, the
    cost variance is--
   a.   $150
   b.   -$150
   c.   -$350
   d.   -$500

12. When you review cost performance data on your project, different responses
    will be required depending on the degree of variance or control thresholds
    from the baseline. For example, a variance of 10 percent might not require
    immediate action, whereas a variance of 100 percent will require investiga-
    tion. A description of how you plan to manage cost variances should be
    included in the--
   a.   Cost management plan
   b.   Change management plan
   c.   Performance measurement plan
   d.   Variance management plan

13. As of the fourth month on the Acme project, cumulative planned expendi-
    tures were $100,000. Actual expenditures totaled $120,000. How is the Acme
    project doing?
   a.   It is ahead of schedule.
   b.   It is in trouble because of a cost overrun.
   c.   It will finish within the original budget.
   d.   The information is insufficient to make an assessment.
100    PMP(R) Exam Practice Test and Study Guide


        14. On your project, you need to assign costs to the time period in which they
            are incurred. To do this, you should--
           a.   Identify the project components so that costs can be allocated
           b.   Use the project schedule as an input to determine budget
           c.   Prepare a detailed and accurate cost estimate
           d.   Prepare a cost performance plan

        15. You have a number of costs to track and manage because your project is
            technically very complex. They include direct costs and indirect (overhead)
            costs. You have found that managing overhead costs is particularly difficult
            because they--
           a.   Are handled on a project-by-project basis
           b.   Represent only direct labor costs
           c.   Represent only equipment and materials needed for the project
           d.   Are usually beyond the project manager's control

        16. If you want to calculate the ETC based on the assumption that work is pro-
            ceeding as planned, the remaining work can be calculated by which of the
            following formulas?
           a.   ETC = BAC - EV
           b.   ETC = (BAC - EV)/CPI
           c.   ETC = AC + EAC
           d.   ETC = EAC - AC

        17. You receive a frantic phone call from your vice president who says she is
            going to meet with a prospective client in 15 minutes to discuss a large and
            complex project. She asks you how much the project will cost. You quickly
            think of some similar past projects, factor in a few unknowns, and give her
            a number. What type of estimate did you just provide?
           a.   Definitive
           b.   Budget
           c.   Order-of-magnitude
           d.   Detailed

       18. Your approved cost baseline has changed because of a major scope change
           on your project. Your next step should be to--
           a.   Estimate the magnitude of the scope change
           b.   Issue a change request
           c.   Document lessons learned
           d.   Execute the approved scope change
                                                           Project Cost Management    101


19. Which of the following is a tool for analyzing a design, determining its func-
    tions, and assessing how to provide those functions' cost effectively?
   a.   Pareto diagram
   b.   Value analysis
   c.   Configuration management
   d.   Value engineering

20. There are many useful EVM metrics, but the most critical is--
   a.   CPI
   b.   EAC
   c.   TCPI
   d.   VAC

21. The approved, integrated scope-schedule-cost plan for project work is--
   a.   Project budget baseline
   b.   Performance measurement baseline
   c.   Level-of-effort control accounts
   d.   Expressed in the To Complete Performance Index

22. It is expensive to lease office space in cities around the world. Office space
    can cost approximately USD $80 per square foot in Tampa, Florida. And
    it can cost approximately 50,000 per square meter in Tokyo. These "aver-
    ages" can help a person to determine how much it will cost to lease office
    space in these cities based on the amount of space leased. These estimates
    are examples of--
   a.   Variance analysis
   b.   Parametric estimating
   c.   Bottom-up estimating
   d.   Reserve analysis

23. Your project manager has requested that you provide him with a forecast of
    project costs for the next 12 months. He needs this information to determine
    if the budget should be increased or decreased on this major construction
    project. In addition to the usual information sources, which of the following
    should you also consider?
   a.   Cost estimates from similar projects
   b.   WBS
   c.   Project schedule
   d.   Costs that have been authorized and incurred
102    PMP(R) Exam Practice Test and Study Guide


        24. There are a number of different earned value management rules of perfor-
            mance measurement that can be established as part of the cost management
            plan. Which one of the following is NOT an example of such a rule?
           a.   Code of accounts allocation provision
           b.   Formulas to determine the EAC
           c.   Earned value measurement techniques
           d.   Definition of the WBS level

        25. Which of the following calculations CANNOT be used to determine EAC?
           a.   EAC = ETC-AC
           b.   EAC = BAC/CPI
           c.   EAC = AC + BAC--EV
           d.   EAC = AC + (BAC-EV)/(CPI x SPI)

       26. Typically, the statement "no one likes to estimate, because they know their
           estimate will be proven incorrect" is true. However, you have been given
           the challenge of estimating the costs for your nuclear reactor project. A basic
           assumption that you need to make early in this process is--
           a.   How direct and indirect costs will be handled
           b.   Whether or not experts will be available to assist you in this process
           c.   If there will be a multiyear project budget
           d.   Whether the project has required delivery dates

        27. By reviewing cumulative cost curves, the project manager can monitor--
           a.   EAC
           b.   PV, EV, and AC
           c.   CVs and SVs
           d.   CPI and SPI

       28. Control accounts--
           a.   Are charge accounts for personnel time management
           b.   Summarize project costs at level 2 of the WBS
           c.   Identify and track management reserves
           d.   Represent the basic level at which project performance is measured and
                reported
                                                            Project Cost Management    103


29. Performance review meetings are held to assess schedule activity and work
    packages over-running or under-running the budget and to determine any
    estimated funds needed to complete work in progress. Typically, if EV is
    being used, all but which of the following information is determined?
   a.   Variance analysis
   b.   Trend analysis
   c.   Time reporting systems
   d.   Earned value performance

30. Overall cost estimates must be allocated to individual activities to estab-
    lish the cost performance baseline. In an ideal situation, a project manager
    would prefer to prepare estimates--
   a. Before the budget is complete
   b. After the budget is approved by management
   c. Using a parametric estimating technique and model specific for that proj-
      ect type
   d. Using a bottom-up estimating technique

31. One way to engage team members to improve estimate accuracy is to--
   a.   Hold a focus group
   b.   Use vendor bid analysis
   c.   Use a Delphi approach
   d.   Involve industry groups

32. Assume you have used reserve analysis as a tool and technique to Control
    Costs. However, during this project you have focused on continual risk iden-
    tification and subsequent analysis of the identified risks. In fact you had a
    risk expert on your team. This means you may need to--
   a.   Use management reserve
   b.   Re-baseline your cost estimate
   c.   Perform an assumptions analysis
   d.   Request additional contingency reserves for your budget

33. Increased attention to return on investment (ROI) now requires you to re-
    estimate the costs for your project. When you looked at how costs were first
    estimated, you realized an order-of-magnitude estimate was prepared, which
    was never refined. Therefore, now you are estimating costs from the begin-
    ning. This project is the development of a new smart TV and automated
    home, and you realize market conditions should be reviewed because--
   a.   A competitor may be working on the same product
   b.   Global supply and demand conditions can influence resource costs
   c.   Resource cost data are available in your company's knowledge transfer system
   d.   Expert judgment can assist in determining when costs exceed profit
104    PMP(R) Exam Practice Test and Study Guide


       34. A revised cost baseline may be required in cost control when--
           a. CVs are severe, and a realistic measure of performance is needed
           b. Updated cost estimates are prepared and distributed to stakeholders
           c. Corrective action must be taken to bring expected future performance in
              line with the project plan
           d. EAC shows that additional funds are needed to complete the project even
              if a scope change is not needed

        35. As project manager, you identified a number of acceptable tolerances as part
            of your earned value management system. During execution, some "unac-
            ceptable" variances occurred. After each "unacceptable" variance occurred, a
            best practice is to--
           a.   Update the budget
           b.   Prepare a revised cost estimate
           c.   Adjust the project plan
           d.   Document lessons learned

       36. Assume that the project cost estimates have been prepared for each activity
           and the basis of these estimates has been determined. Now, as the project
           manager for your nutrition awareness program in your hospital, you are
           preparing your budget. Because you have estimates for more than 1,200
           separate activities, you have decided to first--
           a. Aggregate these estimates by work packages
           b. Aggregate these estimates by control accounts to facilitate the use of
              earned value management
           c. Use the results of previous projects to predict total costs
           d. Set your cost performance baseline

        37. Assume you are using earned value on your project, and as of today, your
            cumulative CPI is below the baseline. This means--
           a. All future work will need to be performed immediately with the range of
              the TCPI.
           b. The ETC work will be performed at an efficiency rate that considers both
              the schedule and performance indices.
           c. What the project has experienced to date is expected to continue
           d. The budget should be re-baselined
                                                          Project Cost Management    105


38. Assume it has become obvious on your project that the budget at comple-
    tion is no longer viable. This means as the project manager, you should--
   a. Recommend to your managers that the project be terminated
   b. Perform an analysis of the remaining tasks on the critical path and take
      corrective or preventive action as required
   c. Determine the relationship of physical performance to costs spent
   d. Consider the forecasted EAC

39. Assume that your actual costs are $800; your planned value is $1,200; and
    your earned value is $1,000. Based on these data, what can be determined
    regarding your schedule variance?
   a. At +$200, the situation is favorable as physical progress is being accom-
      plished ahead of your plan.
   b. At -$200, the physical progress is being accomplished at a slower rate
      than is planned, indicating an unfavorable situation.
   c. At +$400, the situation is favorable as physical progress is being accom-
      plished at a lower cost than was forecasted.
   d. At -$200, you have a behind-schedule condition, and your critical path
      has slipped.

40. The CPI on your project is 0.84. This means that you should--
   a. Place emphasis on improving the timeliness of the physical progress
   b. Reassess the life-cycle costs of your product, including the length of the
      life-cycle phase
   c. Recognize that your original estimates were fundamentally flawed, and
      your project is in an atypical situation
   d. Place emphasis on improving the productivity by which work was being
      performed
                                             Project Cost Management    107


Answer Sheet

1.    a   b    c   d   21.   a   b   c   d

2.    a   b    c   d   22.   a   b   c   d

3.    a   b    c   d   23.   a   b   c   d

4.    a   b    c   d   24.   a   b   c   d

5.    a   b    c   d   25.   a   b   c   d

6.    a   b    c   d   26.   a   b   c   d

7.    a   b    c   d   27.   a   b   c   d

8.    a   b    c   d   28.   a   b   c   d

9.    a   b    c   d   29.   a   b   c   d

10.   a   b    c   d   30.   a   b   c   d

11.   a   b    c   d   31.   a   b   c   d

12.   a   b    c   d   32.   a   b   c   d

13.   a   b    c   d   33.   a   b   c   d

14.   a   b    c   d   34.   a   b   c   d

15.   a   b    c   d   35.   a   b   c   d

16.   a   b    c   d   36.   a   b   c   d

17.   a   b    c   d   37.   a   b   c   d

18.   a   b    c   d   38.   a   b   c   d

19.   a   b    c   d   39.   a   b   c   d

20.   a   b    c   d   40.   a   b   c   d
                                                           Project Cost Management    109


Answer Key
 1. d. -$200; the project is behind schedule
       SV is calculated as EV - PV (in this case, $2,000 - $2,200). It is the
       amount by which the project is ahead or behind the planned deliv-
       ery date at a given point of time. If it is positive, it shows the project
       is ahead of schedule; if it is neutral, it is on schedule. In this example,
       there is a negative variance means that the work completed is less
       than what was planned for at that point in the project, and it is behind
       schedule. [Monitoring and Controlling]
       PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 224
       PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Monitoring and
       Controlling, 9, Task 1

 2. b. 0.80; actual costs have exceeded planned costs
       CPI is calculated as EV/AC (in this case, $2,000/$2,500). EV measures the
       budgeted dollar value of the work that has actually been accomplished,
       whereas AC measures the actual cost of getting that work done. If the
       two numbers are the same, work on the project is being accomplished
       for exactly the budgeted amount of money (and the ratio will be equal
       to 1.0). If actual costs exceed budgeted costs (as in this example), AC
       will be larger than EV, and the ratio will be less than 1.0. CPI is also
       an index of efficiency. In this example, an index of 0.80 (or 80 percent)
       means that for every dollar spent on the project only 80 cents worth
       of work is actually accomplished. At this time, the project is over the
       planned costs. [Monitoring and Controlling]
       PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 224
       PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Monitoring and
       Controlling, 9, Task 1

 3. d. -$500
       CV is calculated as EV - AC (in this case, $2,000 - $2,500). A negative
       CV means that accomplishing work on the project is costing more than
       was budgeted. CV measures the amount of budget surplus or deficit at a
       point in time, and if it is positive, it is under the planned costs; neutral
       means it is on the planned costs. [Monitoring and Controlling]
       PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 224
       PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Monitoring and
       Controlling, 9, Task 1
110    PMP(R) Exam Practice Test and Study Guide


         4. a. $12,500; the revised estimate for total project cost (based on perfor-
               mance thus far)
                 EAC is calculated as BAC/CPI (in this case, $10,000/0.80). It is now
                 known that the project will cost more than the original estimate of
                 $10,000. The project has been getting only 80 cents worth of work done
                 for every dollar spent (CPI), and this information has been used to fore-
                 cast total project costs. This approach assumes that performance for the
                 remainder of the project will also be based on a CPI of 0.80. The EAC
                 is the expected total cost of completing all work expressed as the sum
                 of the actual cost and the estimate to complete (ETC). Recognize there
                 are four ways to calculate the EAC based on different assumptions and
                 learn when to use each method. [Monitoring and Controlling]
                 PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 224
                 PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Monitoring and
                 Controlling, 9, Task 1

         5. c. Has an accuracy rate of 10% of actual costs
                 A frequently used method of estimate costs, the analogous technique
                 relies on experience and knowledge gained to predict future events.
                 This technique provides planners with some idea of the magnitude
                 of project costs but generally not within 10%. It is considered to be
                 a gross value estimating technique, and it is generally less costly and
                 less time consuming than other techniques but also is generally less
                 accurate. It is more reliable when the previous projects are similar, and
                 when the project team members doing the estimating have the needed
                 expertise. [Planning]
                 PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 204-205
                 PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Planning, 6, Task 3

         6. d. Cost baseline
                 The cost baseline is an output from the Determine Budget process. It is
                 the approved version of the time-phased budget excluding any manage-
                 ment reserves and is used for comparison to actual costs. It is devel-
                 oped by summarizing approved budgets for different schedule activities.
                 Review Figure 7-8 in the PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013 to see the components
                 of the project budget and Figure 7-9 to see the cost baseline, expendi-
                 tures, and funding requirements. [Planning]
                 PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 212-214
                 PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Planning, 6, Task 3
                                                          Project Cost Management    111


7. d. Electricity
       Direct costs are incurred for the exclusive benefit of a project (for exam-
       ple, salary of the project manager, materials used by the project, and
       subcontractor expenses). Indirect costs, also called overhead costs, are
       allocated to a project by its performing organization as a cost of doing
       business. These costs cannot be traced to a specific project and are
       accumulated and allocated equitably over multiple projects (for example,
       security guards, fringe benefits, and electricity). Costs are estimated for
       all resources to be charged to the project. [Planning]
       PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 202
       PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Planning, 6, Task 3

8. b. The variance is favorable to the project
       A positive schedule variance indicates that the project is ahead of sched-
       ule. A positive cost variance indicates that the project has incurred less
       cost than estimated for the work accomplished; therefore, the project is
       under budget and ahead of schedule. The CV is calculated as EV-AC,
       and the SV is calculated as the EV-PV. [Monitoring and Controlling]
       PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 224
       PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Monitoring and
       Controlling, 9, Task 1

9. c. Identify and estimate the cost for each work package or activity
       Bottom-up estimating is a method of estimating a component of work.
       It is derived by first estimating the cost of the individual work packages
       or activities to the greatest level of specified detail. Then this detailed
       cost is summarized or `rolled-up' to higher levels for reporting and
       tracking. The cost and accuracy are influenced by the size and com-
       plexity of the activity or the work package. It is a tool and technique in
       the Estimate Costs process. [Planning]
       PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 205
       PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Planning, 6, Task 3
112    PMP(R) Exam Practice Test and Study Guide


        10. b. Determine the cost performance needed to complete the remaining
               work within management's financial goal for the project
                 The TCPI takes the value of work remaining and divides it by the value of
                 funds remaining to obtain the cost performance factor needed to com-
                 plete all remaining work according to a financial goal set by management.
                 There are two methods to calculate the TCPI, and you should be familiar
                 with each one and when it should be used. In this example, the TCPI is
                 calculated by (BAC-EV)/(BAC-AC). If it is greater than one, it is harder to
                 complete; if it is 1, it is the same to complete, and less than one means it
                 is easier to complete. It thus measures the cost performance that must be
                 achieved with the remaining resources to meet a specified management
                 goal and is expressed as a ratio of the cost to finish the outstanding work
                 to the budget that is available. [Monitoring and Controlling]
                 PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 224
                 PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Monitoring and
                 Controlling, 9, Task 1

        11. c. -$350
                 CV is calculated by EV - AC, or $1,500(2/3) - $1,350 = -$350. It is used
                 to determine the amount of budget deficit (as in this example) or sur-
                 plus at any given point in time. In this example, the project is over the
                 planned cost; a positive value indicates it is under the planned costs,
                 while a neutral value shows it on the planned costs. [Monitoring and
                 Controlling]
                 PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 224
                 PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Monitoring and
                 Controlling, 9, Task 1

        12. a. Cost management plan
                 The management and control of costs focuses on variance thresholds.
                 Certain variances are acceptable, and others, usually those falling out-
                 side a particular range, are unacceptable. They are typically expressed
                 as percentage deviations from the baseline plan. The actions taken by
                 the project manager for variances are described in the cost management
                 plan. It is the output of the Plan Cost Management Plan process and
                 also can include: units of measure, level of precision, level of accuracy,
                 links to organizational procedures such as the control account in the
                 WBS, and rules of performance measurement such as earned value
                 management. It describes how project costs will be planned, structured,
                 and controlled. [Planning]
                 PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 199-200
                 PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Planning, 6, Task 3
                                                          Project Cost Management    113


13. d. The information is insufficient to make an assessment.
       The information provided tells us that, as of the fourth month, more
       money has been spent than was planned. However, we need to know
       how much work has been completed to determine how the project is
       performing. In earned value terms, we are missing the EV or the mea-
       sure of work expressed in terms of the budget authorized for the work.
       It is the budget associated for the work that has been completed. The
       objective is to establish progress measurement criteria for each WBS
       component to measure work in progress. EV then is monitored incre-
       mentally to determine current status and cumulatively to determine the
       long-term performance trends. [Monitoring and Controlling]
       PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 218
       PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Monitoring and
       Controlling, 9, Task 1

14. b. Use the project schedule as an input to determine budget
       Accurate project performance measurement depends on accurate cost
       and schedule information. The project schedule includes planned start
       and finish dates for all activities, milestones, work packages, and con-
       trol accounts. This information is used to aggregate costs to the calen-
       dar period for which the costs are planned to be incurred. The project
       schedule is an input to the Determine Budget process. [Planning]
       PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 210
       PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Planning, 6, Task 3

15. d. Are usually beyond the project manager's control
       Overhead includes costs such as rent, insurance, or heating, that pertain
       to the project as a whole and cannot be attributed to a particular work
       item. The amount of overhead to be added to the project is frequently
       decided by the performing organization and is beyond the control of
       the project manager. [Planning]
       Meredith, J.R. and Mantel, Jr., S.J., Project Management: A Managerial
       Approach, 2012, 301
       PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 202
       PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Planning, 6, Task 3
114    PMP(R) Exam Practice Test and Study Guide


        16. d. ETC = EAC - AC
                 The ETC is the expected cost to finish the remaining work. This for-
                 mula is used if the work is performing as planned. Otherwise you
                 may need to re-estimate the remaining work from the bottom up.
                 [Monitoring and Controlling]
                 PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 224
                 PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Monitoring and
                 Controlling, 9, Task 1

        17. c. Order-of-magnitude
                 An order-of-magnitude estimate, which is referred to also as a ballpark
                 estimate, has an accuracy range of -25% to 75% and is made without
                 detailed data. These estimates are made when the project is in the
                 initiation stage. The cost estimates should be reviewed and refined dur-
                 ing the project to reflect additional detail. As the project progresses the
                 accuracy of the estimates will increase. Later in the project, for example
                 the range of accuracy can be narrowed to -5% to +10%. [Planning]
                 PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 201
                 PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Planning, 6, Task 3

        18. b. Issue a change request
                 Before a revised cost baseline leading to a budget update can be pre-
                 pared, it is necessary to issue a change request, which may include pre-
                 ventive or corrective action. These change requests then are reviewed
                 and processed through the Perform Integrated Change Control pro-
                 cess. Change requests are an output of the Control Costs process. After
                 analysis of project performance, change requests may be also needed
                 for other components in addition to the cost baseline. [Monitoring
                 and Controlling]
                 PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 225
                 PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Monitoring and
                 Controlling, 9, Task 1
                                                         Project Cost Management    115


19. d. Value engineering
       Value engineering considers possible cost trade-offs as a design evolves.
       The technique entails identifying the functions that are needed and
       analyzing the cost effectiveness of the alternatives available for provid-
       ing them. It helps optimize project life cycle costs, save time, increase
       profits, improve quality, increase market share, solve problems,
       and contribute toward more effective resource use [Monitoring and
       Controlling]
       PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 566
       PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Monitoring and
       Controlling, 9, Task 1

20. a. CPI
       The CPI has been proven to be an accurate and reliable forecasting
       tool. It is a measure of the cost efficiency of budgeted resources and is
       considered to be the most critical earned value measurement metric. It
       measures the cost efficiency for the work completed. Its indices are use-
       ful for providing a basis to estimate project cost and schedule outcome.
       [Monitoring and Controlling]
       PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 219
       PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Monitoring and
       Controlling, 9, Task 1

21. b. Performance measurement baseline
       The performance measurement baseline is the approved plan for the
       project work, which is used to compare actual project execution. From
       it, deviations are measured for management control. It typically inte-
       grates scope, schedule, and cost parameters; it may include technical
       and quality parameters. It includes a contingency reserve but not a
       management reserve. Contingency reserves are the budget in the cost
       baseline allocated to identifying risks that are accepted and for which
       contingent or mitigation responses are developed. [Monitoring and
       Controlling]
       PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 206, 302, 549
       PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Monitoring and
       Controlling, 9, Task 1
116  PMP(R) Exam Practice Test and Study Guide


         22. b. Parametric estimating
                 Parametric estimating involves using statistical relationships between
                 historical data and other variables to calculate a cost estimate for project
                 work. This approach can produce higher levels of accuracy depending
                 on the sophistication and underlying data in the model. Parametric esti-
                 mates may be used for the entire project or for parts of it in conjunction
                 with other estimating techniques. The example is representative of a
                 simple parametric model. [Planning]
                 PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 205
                 PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Planning, 6, Task 3

         23. d. Costs that have been authorized and incurred
                 These costs are part of work performance data about project prog-
                 ress. In addition, data include information about project progress such
                 as which activities have started, their progress, and which deliver-
                 ables have finished. Other information includes costs that have been
                 authorized and incurred. Updating the budget requires knowledge
                 about the actual costs spent to date, and any budget changes are
                 approved according to the Perform Integrated Change Control process.
                 [Monitoring and Controlling]
                 PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 216-217
                 PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Monitoring and
                 Controlling, 9, Task 1

         24. a. Code of accounts allocation provision
                 Rules of earned value performance measurement are part of the cost
                 management plan and may (1) define the points in the WBS where
                 measurement of control accounts will be performed; (2) establish the
                 EV measurement techniques such as weighted milestones, fixed-for-
                 mula, percent complete, etc., to be used; and (3) specific tracking meth-
                 ods and EV equations for calculating the EAC forecasts to provide a
                 validity check on the bottom-up EAC. [Planning]
                 PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 199
                 PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Planning, 6, Task 3
                                                         Project Cost Management    117


25. a. EAC = ETC - AC
       EAC is the expected total cost of completing all work expressed as the
       sum of the actual cost to date and the estimate at completion. There
       are four methods to compute it based on different assumptions. If the
       CPI is expected to be the same for the remainder of the project use
       EAC = BAC/CPI or answer b. If future work will be accomplished at the
       planned rate, use EAC = AC + BAC - EV or answer c. If the initial plan
       no longer is valid, use EAC = AC + Bottom-up ETC. If both the CPI and
       the SPI influence the remaining work, use EAC = AC + (BAC-EV)/(CPI x
       SPI) or answer d. [Monitoring and Controlling]
       PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 220-221
       PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Monitoring and
       Controlling, 9, Task 1

26. a. How direct and indirect costs will be handled
       The scope statement, as part of the scope baseline, is a key input in the
       Estimate Costs process and should be reviewed. It provides the product
       description, acceptance criteria, key deliverables, project boundaries,
       assumptions, and constraints about the project. It also notes one basic
       assumption that must be made as costs are estimated is whether the
       estimates will be limited only to direct project costs or whether they
       also will include indirect project costs. The indirect costs cannot be
       directly traced to a single project and are accumulated and allocated
       equally over multiple projects using an approved and documented
       accounting procedure. [Planning]
       PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 202
       PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Planning, 6, Task 3

27. b. PV, EV, and AC
       Cumulative cost curves, or S-curves, enable the project manager to
       monitor the three parameters of planned value, earned value, and
       actual cost and to report on a period-by-period basis, such as weekly,
       monthly, or on a cumulative basis. Please see Figure 7-12 in the
       PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013 for a reference. [Monitoring and Controlling]
       PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 219
       PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Monitoring and
       Controlling, 9, Task 1
118    PMP(R) Exam Practice Test and Study Guide


        28. d. Represent the basic level at which project performance is measured and
               reported
                 Control accounts represent a management control point where scope, bud-
                 get, actual costs, and schedule are integrated and compared to earned
                 value for performance measurement. Each control account has a unique
                 code or account number that links directly to the organization's accounting
                 system. They are described in the project's cost management plan. [Planning]
                 PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 132, 199, and 533
                 PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Planning, 6, Task 3

        29. c. Time reporting systems
                 Variance analysis, as used in earned value management, is the expla-
                 nation (cause, issue, and corrective action) for cost and schedule vari-
                 ance at completion (VAC = BAC-EAC). If earned value is not being used,
                 variance analysis compares planned activity cost against actual activity
                 cost to identify variances between the cost baseline and actual project
                 performance. In cost control, variance analysis is important to deter-
                 mine the cause and degree of variance relative to the baseline to decide
                 if corrective or preventive action is required. As more work is done, the
                 percentage of acceptable variances tends to decrease. Trend analysis
                 examines project performance over time to determine performance sta-
                 tus to see if it is improving or deteriorating. Earned value performance
                 compares the performance measurement baseline to actual schedule
                 and cost performance. [Monitoring and Controlling]
                 PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 222-223
                 PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Monitoring and
                 Controlling, 9, Task 1

        30. a. Before the budget is complete
                 Often project cost estimates are prepared after budgetary approval is
                 provided. However, activity cost estimates should be prepared before
                 the budget is complete. Activity cost estimates are an output of the
                 Estimate Costs process and an Input to the Determine Budget process.
                 They are quantitative assessments of the probable costs required to
                 complete project work. Costs are estimated for all resources applied
                 to the activity cost estimate such as direct labor, materials, equipment,
                 services, facilities, and technology. They also include other categories
                 such as cost of financing (e.g., interest charges), an inflation allowance,
                 exchange rates, or a cost contingency reserve. Indirect costs may be
                 included at the activity level or at a higher level. [Planning]
                 PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 210
                 PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Planning, 6, Task 3
                                                          Project Cost Management    119


31. c. Use a Delphi approach
       In Estimate Costs, one tool and technique is group decision-making
       techniques, which include brainstorming, the Delphi approach, or
       nominal group techniques. They are useful to engage stakeholders
       to improve the accuracy of estimates and commitment to emerging
       estimates. When a structured group of people, who are close to the
       technical execution of the work, are involved in estimating the work
       additional information is obtained, leading to more accurate estimat-
       ing. When people are involved in the estimating process, they tend to
       become more committed to meeting the resulting estimates that are
       made. [Planning]
       PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 207
       PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Planning, 6, Task 3

32. d. Request additional contingency reserves for your budget
       Reserve analysis monitors the status of contingency and management
       reserves to see if they are still needed or if additional reserves need to
       be requested. The reserves may be used as planned to cover risk miti-
       gation costs. In this situation, risk identification and analysis are ongo-
       ing, and they may indicate a need to request additional reserves to the
       budget, which may be a management reserve, a contingency reserve, or
       both. [Monitoring and Controlling]
       PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 225
       PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Monitoring and
       Controlling, 9, Task 1

33. b. Global supply and demand conditions can influence resource costs
       Market conditions, along with published commercial information, are
       enterprise environmental assets, an input to Estimate Costs. Market
       conditions describe the products, services, and results available in the
       market and who provides them, along with any terms and conditions.
       As well, regional and global supply and demand conditions can greatly
       influence resource costs, assisting in the estimating process. [Planning]
       PMI(R) PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 203
       PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Planning, 6, Task 3
120      PMP(R) Exam Practice Test and Study Guide


          34. a. CVs are severe, and a realistic measure of performance is needed
                   After the CVs exceed certain ranges, the original project budget may
                   be questioned and changed as a result of new information. Changes to
                   the cost baseline are incorporated in response to approved changes in
                   scope, activity resources, or cost estimates. [Monitoring and Controlling]
                   PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 226
                   PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Monitoring and
                   Controlling, 9, Task 1

          35. d. Document lessons learned
                   Lessons learned but not documented are "lessons lost." The lessons
                   learned knowledge database will help current project members, as well
                   as people on future projects, make better decisions. Accordingly, the
                   reasons for the variance, the rationale supporting the corrective action,
                   and other related informationmust be documented. They require
                   updates as part of updates to organizational process assets as an output
                   of Control Costs. [Monitoring and Controlling]
                   PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 226
                   PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Monitoring and
                   Controlling, 9, Task 6

          36. a. Aggregate these estimates by work packages
                   The WBS provides the relationship among all the project deliverables
                   and their components and should be reviewed before the budget is
                   developed. As the budget is determined, the cost estimates for the
                   activities should be aggregated by the work packages in the WBS.
                   Then, they are aggregated for the control accounts and finally for the
                   entire project. The summation of the control accounts comprises the
                   cost baseline, and it enables a time-phased view of it, which typically is
                   displayed as an S-cure. Refer to Figure 7-9 in the PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013
                   for an example. [Planning]
                   PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 213-214
                   PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Planning, 6, Task 3
                                                          Project Cost Management    121


37. a. All future work will need to be performed immediately with the range
       of the TCPI
       The TCPI is a measure of cost performance that is required to be
       achieved with the remaining resources to meet a specified management
       goal. It is expressed as the ratio of the cost to finish the remaining work
       to the remaining budget. If the cumulative CPI falls below the baseline,
       future project work will need to be performed immediately within the
       range of the TCPI to stay within the authorized budget at completion.
       Whether this performance level is achievable is a judgment call based
       on considerations such as risk, schedule, and technical performance.
       Refer to Figure 7-13 in the PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, for an example. .
       [Monitoring and Controlling]
       PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 221
       PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Monitoring and
       Controlling, 9, Task 1

38. d. Consider the forecasted EAC
       Forecasting is a tool and technique in Control Costs. In this situation,
       use of the forecasted EAC is recommended because it involves making
       projections of future conditions and events on the basis of current per-
       formance information and other knowledge that is available. Forecasts
       are generated, updated, and reissued based on work performance
       data provided as the project is executed. EACs are typically based
       on the actual costs for work completed plus an estimate to complete.
       [Monitoring and Controlling]
       PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 220
       PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Monitoring and
       Controlling, 9, Task 1

39. b. At -$200, the physical progress is being accomplished at a slower rate
       than is planned, indicating an unfavorable situation.
       SV (schedule variance) is calculated: EV - PV or $1,000 - $1,200 = -$200.
       Because the SV is negative, physical progress is being accomplished at
       a slower rate than planned. It is a useful metric because it can indicate
       when a project is falling behind or is ahead of its baseline schedule.
       Ultimately, it equals zero when the project is complete because all the
       planned values have been earned. It should be used along with moni-
       toring the critical path. [Monitoring, and Controlling]
       PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 218, 224
       PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Monitoring and
       Controlling, 9, Task 1
122      PMP(R) Exam Practice Test and Study Guide


          40. d. Place emphasis on improving the productivity by which work was
                 being performed
                   CPI = EV/AC and measures the efficiency of the physical progress
                   accomplished compared to the baseline. A CPI of 0.84 means that
                   for every dollar spent, you are only receiving 84 cents of progress.
                   Therefore, you should focus on improving the productivity by which
                   work is being performed as now it represents a cost overrun for the
                   project. [Monitoring and Controlling]
                   PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 219, 224
                   PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Monitoring and
                   Controlling, 9, Task 1
Project Quality Management


Study Hints
The Project Quality Management questions on the PMP(R) certification exam are
straightforward--especially if you know definitions of terms and understand
statistical process control. You are not required to solve quantitative problems,
but there may be questions on statistical methods of measuring and controlling
quality.
    The exam is likely to reflect a heavy emphasis on customer satisfaction and
continuous improvement through the use of quality tools such as Pareto analy-
sis and cause-and-effect diagrams. You should know the differences among Plan
Quality Management, Perform Quality Assurance, and Perform Quality Control.
    The PMBOK(R) Guide includes all quality-related activities under the term
Project Quality Management, which comprises the three quality processes
mentioned above. Before taking the practice test, review PMBOK(R) Guide,
2013, Figure 8-1 for an overview of the Project Quality Management structure.
Know this chart thoroughly.
    Following is a list of the major Project Quality Management topics. Use it to
help focus your study efforts on the areas most likely to appear on the exam.




                                                                               123
                                       Project Quality Management    125


Major Topics
Key PMBOK(R) Guide concepts
Quality defined
Quality management
Quality policy
Quality and grade
Accuracy and precision
Customer satisfaction
Prevention over inspection
Continuous improvement
SIPOC model
Management responsibility
Seven basic quality tools

   Cause-and-effect diagrams
   Flowcharts
   Checksheets
   Pareto diagrams
   Histograms
   Control charts
   Scatter diagrams

Plan quality management tools

   Cost-benefit analysis
   Benchmarking
   Design of experiments
   Cost of quality
   Statistical sampling
   Brainstorming
   Force field analysis
   Nominal group technique

Key quality planning documents

   Quality management plan
   Quality metrics
   Quality checklists
   Process improvement plan

Quality control measurements
Quality management and control tools
126      PMP(R) Exam Practice Test and Study Guide


            Affinity diagrams
            Process decision program charts
            Interrelationship diagraphs
            Tree diagrams
            Prioritization matrices
            Activity network diagrams
            Matrix diagrams

         Quality audits
         Process analysis
         Quality control

            Variable sampling
            Attribute sampling
            Tolerances and control limits
            Prevention
            Probability
            Standard deviation
            Validated changes
            Verified deliverables

         Approved change requests review
         Impact of motivation on quality
         Priority of quality versus cost and schedule
         Design and quality
                                                        Project Quality Management    127


Practice Questions
   INSTRUCTIONS: Note the most suitable answer for each multiple-choice
   question in the appropriate space on the answer sheet.

 1. Quality is very important to your company. Each project has a quality state-
    ment that is consistent with the organization's vision and mission. Both
    internal and external quality assurance are provided on all projects to--
   a. Ensure confidence that the project will satisfy relevant quality standards
   b. Monitor specific project results to note whether they comply with relevant
      quality standards
   c. Identify ways to eliminate causes of unsatisfactory results
   d. Use inspection to keep errors out of the process

 2. Benchmarking is a technique used in--
   a.   Inspections
   b.   Root cause analysis
   c.   Plan Quality Management
   d.   Control Quality

 3. In quality management, the practice "rework" is--
   a. Acceptable under certain circumstances
   b. An adjustment made that is based on quality control measurements
   c. Action taken to bring a defective or nonconforming component into
      compliance
   d. Not a concern if errors are detected early

 4. Requirements documentation is useful in project quality management
    because it--
   a.   Provides better product definition and product development
   b.   Helps products to succeed in the marketplace
   c.   Helps plan how quality control will be implemented on the project
   d.   Helps control the overall cost of quality

 5. Often, one quality tool may lead to the development of another useful qual-
    ity tool. An example is--
   a.   Process decision point program charts
   b.   A roadmap
   c.   Interrelationship diagraphs
   d.   Force field analysis
128      PMP(R) Exam Practice Test and Study Guide


           6. You are leading a research project that will require between 10 and 20 aero-
              space engineers. Some senior-level aerospace engineers are available. They
              are more productive than junior-level engineers, who cost less and who are
              available as well. You want to determine the optimal combination of senior-
              and junior-level personnel. In this situation, the appropriate technique to use
              is to--
             a.   Conduct a design of experiments
             b.   Use the Ishikawa diagram to pinpoint the problem
             c.   Prepare a control chart
             d.   Analyze the process using a Pareto diagram

           7. Checksheets are one of the seven basic quality tools. Often overlooked is
              that the data about frequencies or consequences in checksheets--
             a. Can be used to formulate the problem for a cause-and-effect diagram
             b. Use statistical techniques to compute a "loss function" to determine the
                cost of producing products that fail to achieve a target value
             c. Can be displayed in Pareto diagrams
             d. Are useful for benchmarking

           8. One area that often influences perceptions of quality is--
             a.   Cultural concerns
             b.   Information from the risk register
             c.   Organizational quality policies
             d.   Specific tolerances

           9. Which of the following statements best describes attribute sampling versus
              variables sampling?
             a. Attribute sampling is concerned with prevention, whereas variables sam-
                pling is concerned with inspection.
             b. Attribute sampling is concerned with conformance, whereas variables
                sampling is concerned with the degree of conformity.
             c. Attribute sampling is concerned with special causes, whereas variables
                sampling is concerned with any causes.
             d. Both are the same concept.
                                                        Project Quality Management    129


10. Your project scheduler has just started working with your project and has
    produced defect reports for the past two accounting cycles. If this continues,
    these defect reports could provide the potential for customer dissatisfaction
    and lost productivity that is due to rework. You discovered that the project
    scheduler needs additional training on using the scheduling tool that is used
    on your project. The cost of training falls under which one of the following
    categories?
   a.   Overhead costs
   b.   Failure costs
   c.   Prevention costs
   d.   Indirect costs

11. In order to use approved change requests as an input to Control Quality, it is
    important to--
   a.   Have a change management plan
   b.   Update the change log
   c.   Implement recommendations from the CCB
   d.   Verify their timely implementation

12. It is important to use statistical sampling during Plan Quality Management in
    order to--
   a. Help determine the cost of quality
   b. Determine when attribute sampling versus variables sampling is more
      appropriate
   c. Set tolerances and control limits
   d. Differentiate between special causes and random causes

13. Rank ordering of defects should be used to guide corrective action. This is
    the underlying principle behind--
   a.   Trend analysis
   b.   Inspections
   c.   Control charts
   d.   Pareto diagrams
130    PMP(R) Exam Practice Test and Study Guide


          14. Project quality management was once thought to include only inspection or
              quality control. In recent years, the concept of project quality management
              has broadened. Which statement is NOT representative of the new definition
              of quality management?
             a. Quality is designed into the product or service, not inspected into it.
             b. Quality is the concern of the quality assurance staff.
             c. Customers require a documented and, in some cases, registered quality
                assurance system.
             d. National and international standards and guidelines for quality assurance
                systems are available.

          15. Assume your organization is a start-up company, and you are trying to
              explain the importance of project quality management to the management
              team, which has not worked in this area before. You make an analogy to
              archery in your presentation, because one of the managers is an expert in it.
              You tell them arrows clustered tightly in one area of the target, even if they
              are not in the area of the bull's eye, have a high precision, but targets where
              the arrows are more spread out but are equidistant from the bull's eye are
              considered to have the same degree of accuracy. This analogy shows--
             a. Precision measures exactness, while accuracy assesses correctness
             b. Both are of equal importance in preparing and executing a quality man-
                agement plan on the company's projects
             c. The next step is to design an experiment to determine the sufficient
                degree of accuracy and precision required for an upcoming project
             d. Precise measurements are accurate measurements, but accurate measure-
                ments may not necessarily be precise ones

          16. Your quality assurance department recently performed a quality audit of
              your project and identified a number of findings and recommendations.
              One recommendation seems critical and should be implemented because it
              affects successful delivery of the product to your customer. Your next step
              should be to--
             a. Call a meeting of your project team to see who is responsible for the
                problem
             b. Reassign the team member who had responsibility for oversight of the
                problem
             c. Perform product rework immediately
             d. Issue a change request to implement the needed corrective action
                                                         Project Quality Management    131


17. Using control charts is one way to monitor cost and schedule variances,
    volume, frequency of scope changes, and other results to determine if the
    project management processes are stable. Assume you are working on a
    project that implements a repetitive process because its result is used many
    times after the process is designed and tested in telecommunications. Since
    it is repetitive, the control limits are:
   a. Seven consecutive plot points above the mean
   b. Ways to identify which factors have the greatest influence
   c.+/- 3 s around a process mean set at 0 s
   d. Seven consecutive plot points below the mean

18. Projects tend to result in change, and people tend to resist change. Wanting
    to avoid resistance against the new manufacturing process that you are
    implementing, you--
   a.   Prepare and follow a change management plan
   b.   Use force field analysis
   c.   Involve all stakeholders using a nominal group technique approach
   d.   Use benchmarking

19. Assume previous projects in the organization have overrun their budgets
    consistently and tend to require more contingency reserves than in the origi-
    nal budget. You are striving to avoid the need for additional contingency on
    your project and are doing so by--
   a.   Involving more stakeholders in the risk identification process
   b.   Using a process decision program chart
   c.   Consulting the knowledge transfer system
   d.   Using quality circles

20. Quality inspections also may be called--
   a.   Control tests
   b.   Walkthroughs
   c.   Statistical sampling
   d.   Checklists

21. Your management has prescribed that a quality audit be conducted at the
    end of every phase in a project. This audit is part of the organization's--
   a.   Perform Quality Assurance process
   b.   Control Quality process
   c.   Quality improvement program
   d.   Process adjustment program
132    PMP(R) Exam Practice Test and Study Guide


          22. You are managing a major international project, and your contract requires
              you to prepare both a project plan and a quality management plan. Your
              core team is preparing a project quality management plan. Your first step in
              developing this plan is to--
             a.   Determine specific metrics to use in the quality management process
             b.   Identify the quality standards for the project
             c.   Develop a quality policy for the project
             d.   Identify specific quality management roles and responsibilities for the
                  project

          23. Recently your company introduced a new set of "metal woods" to its estab-
              lished line of golfing equipment. As you work in quality assurance on this
              project, you decide to use a matrix diagram as it--
             a. Analyzes the product development cycle after product release to deter-
                mine strengths and weaknesses
             b. Shows the strength of relationships between factors, causes, and
                objectives
             c. Identifies non-conformity, gaps, and shortcomings
             d. Analyzes the quality of the processes of the project against organizational
                standards

          24. An often overlooked function of a quality audit is to--
             a.   Confirm the implementation of approved change requests
             b.   Examine constraints experienced
             c.   Update training plans
             d.   Establish quality metrics

          25. On-time performance, cost control, defect frequency, failure rates, availabil-
              ity, reliability, and test coverage are examples of--
             a. Incentives to vendors to make quality commitments to improve overall
                performance
             b. Quality metrics as an input to Perform Quality Assurance
             c. Methods that usually result in lower costs and increased profitability
             d. Items to include as goals in the quality management plan

          26. Rework required, causes for rejection, and the need for process adjustment
              are examples of--
             a.   Work performance data in Perform Quality Assurance
             b.   Work performance information in Control Quality
             c.   Items that are part of the process improvement plan
             d.   Items to cover at meetings used to prepare the quality management and
                  process improvement plans
                                                           Project Quality Management    133


27. Quality control measurements are captured--
   a.   As   specified in the Plan Quality Management process
   b.   To   prepare an operational definition
   c.   To   prepare a control chart
   d.   As   an output to Perform Quality Assurance

28. The control chart is a tool used primarily to help--
   a.   Monitor process variation over time
   b.   Measure the degree of conformance
   c.   Determine whether results conform to benefits
   d.   Determine whether results conform to requirements

29. An often, but important, overlooked output of the Plan Quality Management
    process is the Process Improvement Plan. While its focus is on the steps to
    analyze project management and product development processes to identify
    activities to enhance their value, it also includes--
   a. An approach to ensure the information for decisions is of the highest reli-
      ability and accuracy
   b. A process to ensure checklists do not limit the Plan Quality Assurance
      and Control Quality process
   c. A process configuration with interfaces
   d. A process to focus on the project's value proposition

30. You are a project manager for residential construction. As a project manager,
    you must be especially concerned with building codes--particularly in the
    Plan Quality Management process. You must ensure that building codes are
    reflected in your project plans because--
   a.   Standards and regulations are an input to Plan Quality Management
   b.   Quality audits serve to ensure there is compliance with regulations
   c.   They are a cost associated with quality initiatives
   d.   Compliance with standards is the primary objective of Control Quality

31. You work as a project manager in the largest hospital in the region. Studies
    have shown that patients have to wait for long periods before being treated.
    To assist in identifying the factors contributing to this problem, you and your
    team have decided to use which of the following techniques?
   a.   Cause-and-effect diagrams
   b.   Pareto analysis
   c.   Scatter diagrams
   d.   Control charts
134    PMP(R) Exam Practice Test and Study Guide


          32. Basic quality management as defined in the PMBOK(R) Guide is intended
              to be compatible with the International Organization for Standardization
              (ISO) quality standards. This means that, among other things, every project
              should--
             a.   Describe how products should be produced
             b.   State specifics for the implementation of quality systems should be stated
             c.   Have a framework for quality systems
             d.   Have a quality management plan

          33. All but one of the following is objectives of a quality audit--
             a.   Good practices being implemented are identified
             b.   Gaps and shortcomings are identified
             c.   Good practices can be introduced elsewhere
             d.   Root cause analysis has been performed as part of process analysis

          34. Quality checklists are an output of Plan Quality Management. These
              checklists--
             a.   Form the basis for quality control measurements
             b.   Are a tool and technique used in the quality audits
             c.   Incorporate the acceptance criteria included in the scope baseline
             d.   Contain product and project attributes

          35. One way to display the sequence of steps and the branching possibilities
              that exist for a process that transforms one or more inputs into one or more
              outputs is to use a process map or a--
             a.   Checklist
             b.   Flowchart
             c.   Tree diagram
             d.   Process decision program chart

          36. Quality requirements of the project are recorded in--
             a.   Process improvement plan
             b.   Quality management plan
             c.   Quality baseline
             d.   Quality metrics
                                                          Project Quality Management    135


37. The below Pareto chart indicates defects in areas associated with billing
    a client for project services. Based on this Pareto analysis, which area, or
    areas, indicate the greatest opportunity for improvement?

                               100
                                90


               Number of Defects
                                80
                                70
                                60
                                50
                                40
                                30
                                20
                                10
                                 0




                                                      e N te
                                       e
                                  r

                                 e

                                de




                                                                  s

                                                                 e

                                                                de


                                                                nt




                                                                  r
                                                               es
                              be




                                                              be
                               at




                                      am




                                                               at




                                                               a
                                                             ou
                            Co




                                                            Co
                                             dr

                                                           tD




                                                            lD
                             R
                          um




                                                          um
                                      N




                                                          m
                          ly




                                           Ad
                        ge




                                                         C




                                                         ai
                                                        ip
                     tN




                                                        A
                       ai




                                                     PV




                                                      M
                                                      ce
                     ar
                     D




                                                     nt
                   un




                                                   on
                  Ch




                                             Re




                                                  ou
                 co




                                                Ph
                                               isc
               Ac




                                             D
                                      Defect Type



   a. The account number, because if it is incorrect, the invoice may be sent to
      the wrong client.
   b. The daily rate, because if it is incorrect, the total amount of the invoice
      will be wrong, which impacts the cash flow.
   c. The charge code, name, address, receipt date, pvc code, discount
      amount, mail date, and phone number, because they are fairly easy to
      confirm and correct, thereby significantly reducing the types of defects.
   d. The account number and daily rate, because they account for 80 percent
      of all defects.

38. You have decided to use a fishbone diagram to identify the relationship
    between an effect and its causes. To begin, you should first--
   a. Select an interdisciplinary team who has used the technique before to
      help brainstorm the problem
   b. Determine the major categories of defects
   c. Set up a process analysis using HIPO charts
   d. Identify the problem

39. Correlation charts seek to explain a change in the dependent variable, Y, in
    relationship to a change in the corresponding independent variable, X. They
    are also known as a(n)--
   a.   Histogram
   b.   Attribute chart
   c.   Control chart
   d.   Scatter diagram
136      PMP(R) Exam Practice Test and Study Guide


          40. The quality management plan should be reviewed early because--
             a. It will show any boundaries to consider
             b. It will enable a sharper focus on the project's value proposition
             c. It can determine whether additional stakeholders, who were not involved
                in the planning meetings, should be consulted
             d. It will focus on the process metrics for greater efficiency
                                         Project Quality Management    137


Answer Sheet

1.    a   b    c   d   21.   a   b   c   d

2.    a   b    c   d   22.   a   b   c   d

3.    a   b    c   d   23.   a   b   c   d

4.    a   b    c   d   24.   a   b   c   d

5.    a   b    c   d   25.   a   b   c   d

6.    a   b    c   d   26.   a   b   c   d

7.    a   b    c   d   27.   a   b   c   d

8.    a   b    c   d   28.   a   b   c   d

9.    a   b    c   d   29.   a   b   c   d

10.   a   b    c   d   30.   a   b   c   d

11.   a   b    c   d   31.   a   b   c   d

12.   a   b    c   d   32.   a   b   c   d

13.   a   b    c   d   33.   a   b   c   d

14.   a   b    c   d   34.   a   b   c   d

15.   a   b    c   d   35.   a   b   c   d

16.   a   b    c   d   36.   a   b   c   d

17.   a   b    c   d   37.   a   b   c   d

18.   a   b    c   d   38.   a   b   c   d

19.   a   b    c   d   39.   a   b   c   d

20.   a   b    c   d   40.   a   b   c   d
                                                        Project Quality Management    139


Answer Key
 1. a. Ensure confidence that the project will satisfy relevant quality standards
        Quality assurance increases project effectiveness and efficiency and pro-
        vides added benefits to project stakeholders. It implements the planned
        and systematic acts and processes in the project's quality management
        plan. It builds confidence that an unfinished output or a work in prog-
        ress will be completed in a way to meet specified requirements and
        specifications. Quality assurance should be performed throughout the
        project. [Executing]
        PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 227, 242-243
        PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Executing, 8, Task 3

 2. c. Plan Quality Management
        Benchmarking involves comparing actual or planned practices to those
        practices of comparable projects to identify best practices, to note
        ideas for improvement, and to provide a way to measure performance.
        Benchmarking may be done by the performing organization, external
        to it, or within the same application area. It enables analogies from proj-
        ects in different application areas to be made. It is a tool and technique
        used in Plan Quality Management. [Planning]
        PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 239
        PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Planning, 6, Task 8

 3. c. Action taken to bring a defective or nonconforming component into
       compliance
        Rework is a frequent cause of project overruns. The project team must
        make every reasonable effort to control and minimize rework so that
        defective or nonconforming components are brought into compliance
        with requirements or specifications. Less rework is a primary benefit of
        meeting quality requirements. It also is an example of an internal failure
        cost or a cost of nonconformance and represents money spent during
        and after the project because of failure. [Monitoring and Controlling]
        PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 235, 559
        PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Monitoring and
        Controlling, 9, Task 1
140  PMP(R) Exam Practice Test and Study Guide


          4. c. Helps plan how quality control will be implemented on the project
                 Requirements documentation is an input to Plan Quality Management.
                 It captures the requirements the project should meet regarding stake-
                 holder expectations. Requirements documentation components include
                 project and product quality requirements, and the project team uses
                 the requirements to help plan how the project will implement quality
                 control. [Planning]
                 PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 234
                 PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Planning, 6, Task 8

          5. c. Interrelationship diagraphs
                 They are an adaptation of relationship diagraphs and provide a process
                 for creative problem solving in moderately complex scenarios that have
                 intertwined logical relationships for up to 50 relevant items. They are
                 often developed from data in other tools such as the affinity diagram,
                 the tree diagram, or the fishbone diagram. [Executing]
                 PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 245
                 PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Executing, 8, Task 3

          6. a. Conduct a design of experiments
                 This technique is used to identify which variables have the most influ-
                 ence on a product or process under development or in production.
                 It also can be used to determine the number and type of tests and
                 their impact on the cost of quality. They also play a role in optimiz-
                 ing products or processes. It is a tool and technique in Plan Quality
                 Management. For example, roller blade designers might want to
                 determine which combination of number of wheels and titanium ball
                 bearings would produce the most desirable "ride" characteristics at a
                 reasonable cost. This technique, however, can be applied to project
                 management issues such as cost and schedule trade-offs. An appropri-
                 ately designed "experiment" often will help project managers to find
                 an optimal solution from a relatively limited number of options, and
                 often it help to determine the number and type of tests to use and their
                 impact on quality. It provides a statistical framework to systematically
                 change all of the important factors rather than focusing on factors one
                 at a time. By analyzing the data it can help provide the optimal condi-
                 tions for the product or process, highlight the factors that influence the
                 results, and reveal the presence of interactions and synergy among the
                 factors. [Planning]
                 PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 239-240
                 PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Planning, 6, Task 8
                                                      Project Quality Management    141


7. c. Can be displayed in Pareto diagrams
      As one of the seven basic quality tools, checksheets, which may be
      called tally sheets, may be used as a checklist in gathering data. They
      serve to organize facts in a manner to facilitate the effective collection
      of useful data about a possible quality problem. They also are used to
      gather attribute data while performing inspections to identify defects.
      The data about the frequencies or consequences of defects collected in
      them are displayed often in Pareto diagrams. [Planning]
      PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 237
      PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Planning, 6, Task 8

8. c. Cultural concerns
      Enterprise environmental factors are an input to Plan Quality
      Management, one of which is cultural perceptions that may influence
      expectations about quality. Other enterprise environmental factors are:
      government agency regulations; rules, standards, and guidelines specific
      to the application area of the project; and working or operating condi-
      tions of the project or its deliverables that may affect product quality.
      [Planning]
      PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 234
      PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Planning, 6, Task 8

9. b. Attribute sampling is concerned with conformance, whereas variables
      sampling is concerned with the degree of conformity.
      Attribute sampling determines whether a result does or does not con-
      form. Variables sampling rates a result on a continuous scale to measure
      the degree of conformity. [Monitoring and Controlling]
      PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 250
      PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Monitoring and
      Controlling, 9, Task 1
142    PMP(R) Exam Practice Test and Study Guide


        10. c. Prevention costs
                 Prevention costs include any expenditure directed toward ensuring that
                 quality is achieved the first time. The objective is to focus on cost of
                 conformance and spend money during the project to avoid failures. The
                 cost of quality is a tool and technique in Plan Quality Management and
                 includes all costs over the life of the product in preventing nonconfor-
                 mance to requirements; appraising the product, service, or result for
                 conformance to requirements; and failing to meet requirements leading
                 to rework. [Planning]
                 PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 235
                 PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Planning, 6, Task 8

        11. d. Verify their timely implementation
                 Approved change requests are an input to Control Quality. As part of
                 the Perform Integrated Change Control process, a change-log update
                 shows some changes are approved, while others are rejected or
                 deferred. The approved change requests may include modifications
                 such as defect repairs, revised work methods, and a revised sched-
                 ule. Their timely implementation should be verified. [Monitoring and
                 Controlling]
                 PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 251
                 PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Monitoring and
                 Controlling, 9, Task 1

        12. a. Help determine the cost of quality
                 Statistical sampling is a tool and technique in Plan Quality Management
                 in that it involves choosing part of a population for inspection such as
                 selecting ten engineering drawings from a population of 95. Sample fre-
                 quency and sizes are determined at this time so the cost of quality will
                 include items such as the number of tests and expected scrap. Statistical
                 sampling is also a tool and technique in Control Quality. [Planning and
                 Monitoring and Controlling]
                 PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 240, 252
                 PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Monitoring and
                 Controlling, 9, Task 1
                 PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Planning, 6, Task 8
                                                       Project Quality Management    143


13. d. Pareto diagrams
        Pareto diagrams are histograms, ordered by frequency of occurrence,
        that show how many results were generated by type or category of
        identified cause. The project team should take action to fix the prob-
        lems that are causing the greatest number of defects first. Pareto dia-
        grams are based on Pareto's Law, which holds that a relatively small
        number of causes will typically produce a large majority of defects, also
        called the "solzo rule." The categories on the horizontal axis exist as a
        valid probability distribution that accounts for about 100% of the pos-
        sible observations. The relative frequency of each specified cause listed
        on the horizontal axis decrease in magnitude until the defect source,
        "other", accounts for any non-specified causes. The Pareto diagram is
        organized into categories that measure frequencies or consequences.
        They are one of the seven basic quality tools used in Plan Quality
        Management. They are also a tool and technique in Control Quality.
        [Planning and Monitoring and Controlling]
        PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 237, 252
        PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Monitoring and
        Controlling, 9, Task 1
        PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Planning, 6, Task 8

14. b. Quality is the concern of the quality assurance staff.
        Quality concerns all levels of management and staff. Its success requires
        participation from all members of the project team with management
        providing the needed resources to succeed. It recognizes the impor-
        tance of customer satisfaction, prevention over inspection, continuous
        improvement, and the cost of quality. The project management team
        determines the level of precision and accuracy to include in the project
        quality management plan. [Planning, Executing, and Monitoring and
        Controlling]
        PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 227-229
        PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Planning, 6, Task 8
        PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Executing, 8, Task 3
        PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Monitoring and
        Controlling, 9, Task 1
144    PMP(R) Exam Practice Test and Study Guide


        15. a. Precision measures exactness, while accuracy assesses correctness
                 In project quality management, the project team determines the level
                 of precision and the level of accuracy needed for the project and docu-
                 ments it in the project's quality management plan. Precise measure-
                 ments are not necessarily accurate ones, and accurate measurements are
                 not necessarily precise ones. [Planning]
                 PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 228
                 PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Planning, 6, Task 8

        16. d. Issue a change request to implement the needed corrective action
                 The information obtained from a quality audit can be used to improve
                 quality systems and performance. The subsequent effort to correct any
                 deficiencies should result in a reduced cost of quality and an increase
                 in customer satisfaction. In most cases, implementing quality improve-
                 ments requires preparation of change requests, which are an output of
                 the Perform Quality Assurance process. They are used to take corrective
                 action preventive action or perform defect repair and are an input to the
                 Perform Integrated Change Control process. [Executing]
                 PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 247
                 PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Executing, 8, Task 3

        17. c. +/- 3 s around a process mean set at 0 s
                 Control charts are one of the seven basic quality tools used as an input
                 in Plan Quality Management and Control Quality. The key words in this
                 question are "repetitive process", which means the control limits are
                 set at +/- 3 s around a process mean set at 0 s. The control charts are
                 used to determine whether or not a process is stable or has predictable
                 performance. Upper and lower limits are set based on requirements,
                 and they reflect the maximum or minimum values allowed. These
                 control limits are not specification limits. They are determined statisti-
                 cally. The project manager and others can use the statistically calculated
                 control limits to identify the points where corrective action is required.
                 [Planning and Monitoring and Controlling]
                 PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 238, 252
                 PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Planning, 6, Task 8
                 PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Monitoring and
                 Controlling, 9, Task 1
                                                       Project Quality Management    145


18. b. Use force field analysis
        Force field analysis is a tool and technique used in Plan Quality
        Management. Its purpose is to use diagrams of the forces for and
        against change to better plan for change from the beginning. It then
        can be used by the project manager and the team as a decision-making
        technique. Developed by Kurt Lewin, it shows the positive or driv-
        ing forces for change and the negative or obstacle, restraining forces.
        The project team then can focus effort in quality planning on ways to
        strengthen the driving, positive forces or weaken the negative ones.
        [Planning]
        PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 240
        PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Planning, 6, Task 8

19. b. Using a process decision program chart
        A process decision program chart is a tool and technique in Plan
        Quality Management and in Perform Quality Assurance. It is used to
        understand a goal, in this example the need to avoid budget over-
        runs and any additional contingency reserve, in relation to the steps to
        achieve the goal. These charts are a method for contingency planning
        because they aid the team in anticipating the intermediate steps that
        could derail achievement of the goal. [Planning and Executing]
        PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 245
        PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Planning, 6, Task 8
        PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Executing, 8, Task 3

20. b. Walkthroughs
        Inspections comprise an examination of a work product to determine
        if it conforms to standards. Additional names for inspections are walk-
        throughs, audits, reviews, or peer reviews (in some application areas,
        these terms may have narrow and specific meanings). They are a tool
        and technique in Control Quality. [Monitoring and Controlling]
        PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 252
        PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Monitoring and
        Controlling, 9, Task 1
146    PMP(R) Exam Practice Test and Study Guide


        21. a. Perform Quality Assurance process
                 Quality assurance involves auditing the quality requirements from
                 quality control measurements to see if appropriate quality standards
                 and operational definitions are used. It facilitates improvements in the
                 quality processes of a project. Quality audits are tools and techniques in
                 the Perform Quality Assurance process and are structured, independent
                 processes to determine if project activities comply with organizational
                 and project policies, processes, and procedures. [Executing]
                 PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 242, 247
                 PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Executing, 8, Task 3

        22. c. Develop a quality policy for the project
                 The quality policy includes the overall intentions and direction of the
                 organization with regard to quality, as formally expressed by top man-
                 agement. If the performing organization lacks a formal quality policy or
                 if the project involves multiple performing organizations, as in a joint
                 venture or a consortium, the project management team must develop
                 a quality policy for the project. The quality policy is one of the organi-
                 zational process assets used as an input in Plan Quality Management,
                 which is endorsed by executives. An output of this process is the qual-
                 ity management plan that describes how the organization's quality poli-
                 cies will be implemented. [Planning]
                 PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 234, 241
                 PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Planning, 6, Task 8

        23. c. Identifies non-conformity, gaps, and shortcomings
                 Matrix diagrams are an example of a quality management and control
                 tool used in the Perform Quality Assurance process. They perform data
                 analysis within the organizational structure identified in the matrix. The
                 matrix diagram then shows the relationships between factors, causes,
                 and objectives that exist between the rows and columns that form the
                 matrix. [Executing]
                 PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 246
                 PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Executing, 8, Task 3
                                                     Project Quality Management    147


24. a. Confirm the implementation of approved change requests
       The quality audit is a tool and technique in Perform Quality Assurance.
       It has many objectives, and the subsequent effort to correct any defi-
       ciencies noted should reduce the cost of quality and increase sponsor
       and customer satisfaction. However, these audits can confirm the imple-
       mentation of approved change requests including updates, corrective
       actions, defect repairs, and preventive actions. [Executing]
       PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 247
       PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Executing, 8, Task 3

25. b. Quality metrics as an input to Perform Quality Assurance
       These examples of metrics describe a project or product attribute and
       how the Control Quality process will measure it. The measurement
       is an actual value. The tolerance defines the allowable variation to
       the metric. For example, if an objective is to remain within +/- of the
       approved budget, the quality metric is used to measure the cost of each
       deliverable and its percent variation from the approved budget for the
       deliverable. They are an output of the Plan Quality Management pro-
       cess. [Planning and Executing]
       PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 242, 252
       PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Executing, 8, Task 3
       PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Planning, 6, Task 8

26. b. Work performance information in Control Quality
       In the Control Quality process, work performance information is an
       output. It is the performance data collected from various controlling
       processes analyzed in context and integrated across areas. Examples
       include information about project requirements fulfillment as shown in
       the answer to the question. [Monitoring and Controlling]
       PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 253
       PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Monitoring and
       Controlling, 9, Task 1

27. a. As specified in the Plan Quality Management process
       One Control Quality output results in measurements that are used as
       inputs to the Perform Quality Assurance process. These quality control
       measurements are the documented results of the Control Quality activi-
       ties. They should be captured in a format specified in the quality man-
       agement plan. [Monitoring and Controlling]
       PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 249, 252
       PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Monitoring and
       Controlling, 9, Task 1
148  PMP(R) Exam Practice Test and Study Guide


         28. a. Monitor process variation over time
                 Used to monitor process variation (i.e., stable or has predictable per-
                 formance) and to detect and correct changes in process performance,
                 the control chart helps people understand and control their processes
                 and work. It enables the project manager, along with appropriate stake-
                 holders, to identify points where corrective action can be taken to
                 prevent unnatural performance as there may be penalties associated
                 with exceeding the specified limits. They are one of the seven basic
                 quality tools and are an input to the Plan Quality Management process
                 and a tool and technique in the Control Quality process. [Planning and
                 Monitoring and Controlling]
                 PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 238, 252
                 PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Planning, 6, Task 8
                 PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Monitoring and
                 Controlling, 9, Task 1

         29. c. A process configuration with interfaces
                 The process configuration is used to facilitate analysis. Other items
                 in this plan are process boundaries, process metrics, and targets for
                 improved performance. Process analysis, a tool and technique in
                 Perform Quality Assurance, follows the steps in this plan to identify
                 needed improvements. [Planning and Executing]
                 PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 241, 247
                 PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Executing, 8, Task 3
                 PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Planning, 6, Task 8

         30. a. Standards and regulations are an input to Plan Quality Management
                 During the Plan Quality Management process, the project management
                 team should consider enterprise environmental factors especially when
                 relevant to a specific application area. Other examples are rules and
                 standards, working or operating conditions, and cultural perceptions
                 that may influence quality expectations. These are conditions outside of
                 the control of the project manager and project team. [Planning]
                 PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 28, 234
                 PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Planning, 6, Task 8
                                                      Project Quality Management    149


31. a. Cause-and-effect diagrams
       Cause-and-effect diagrams, also called Ishikawa diagrams or fishbone
       diagrams, are used to illustrate how various causes and sub causes
       interact to create a special effect. It is named for its developer, Kaoru
       Ishikawa. These diagrams are useful in linking the undesirable effects
       seen as special variation to the assigned cause, enabling project teams
       to implement corrective actions to eliminate the special variation shown
       in a control chart. They are one of the seven basic quality tools, a tool
       and technique in Plan Quality Management and in Control Quality.
       [Planning and Monitoring and Controlling]
       PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 236, 252
       PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Planning, 6, Task 8
       PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Monitoring and
       Controlling, 9, Task 1

32. d. Have a quality management plan
       ISO quality standards state every project should have a quality manage-
       ment plan and should have data to show conformance with the plan.
       Additionally to achieve compatibility with ISO, quality management
       approaches seek to minimize variation and deliver results that meet
       detailed requirements. The approach thus recognizes the importance of
       customer satisfaction, prevention over inspection, continuous improve-
       ment, management responsibility, and the cost of quality. [Planning]
       PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 228-229
       PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Planning, 6, Task 8

33. d. Root cause analysis has been performed as part of process analysis
       The purpose of the quality audit is to determine if project activities
       comply with organizational policies, procedures, and processes. The
       quality audit has a number of objectives associated with it, but root
       cause analysis is part of process analysis to identify needed improve-
       ments in the process improvement plan. The quality audit objectives
       include: identifying good and best practices that are being imple-
       mented; identifying all nonconformities, gaps, and shortcomings; shar-
       ing good practices to similar projects in the organization and possibly in
       the industry; proactively offering assistance to improve implementation
       of processes to help the team increase productivity; and highlighting the
       contributions of each audit in the knowledge repository. [Executing]
       PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 247
       PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Executing, 8, Task 3
150    PMP(R) Exam Practice Test and Study Guide


          34. c. Incorporate the acceptance criteria included in the scope baseline
                   As an output of Plan Quality Management, quality checklists are used
                   to verify that a set of required steps has been performed. They are
                   based on the project's requirements and practices and may be simple or
                   complex. They should incorporate the acceptance criteria included in
                   the scope baseline. [Planning]
                   PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 242
                   PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Planning, 6, Task 8

          35. b. Flowchart
                   A flowchart is one of the seven basic quality tools, a tool and technique
                   in Plan Quality Management and Control Quality. They are also called
                   process maps as noted in the question. They show the activities, deci-
                   sion points, branching loops, parallel paths, and the overall order of
                   processing by mapping the organizational details of procedures that
                   exist within a horizontal chain of a supplier, input, process, output, and
                   customer (SIPOC) model. [Planning and Monitoring and Controlling]
                   PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 236, 252
                   PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Monitoring and
                   Controlling, 9, Task 1
                   PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Planning, 6, Task 8

          36. b. Quality management plan
                   The quality management plan describes how the team will implement
                   the quality policy and how the team will meet the quality requirements
                   set for the project. The style and details of the quality management plan
                   are determined by the quality requirements of the project. [Planning]
                   PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 241, 557
                   PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Planning, 6, Task 8
                                                          Project Quality Management      151


37. d. The account number and daily rate, because they account for
       80 p
           ercent of all defects.
       Pareto analysis focuses on what Joseph Juran called the vital few. It is
       named after Vilfredo Pareto, an Italian economist, whose studies showed
       that 80 percent of the wealth was held by 20 percent of the population.
       The Pareto diagram is used to identify the vital few sources that are respon-
       sible for causing most of the problems effects, in this case the items in the
       answer. It typically shows that 80 percent of all the problems (defects) are
       found in 20 percent of the items or areas studied. It is one of the seven
       basic quality tools, a tool and technique used in Plan Quality Management
       and Control Quality. [Planning and Monitoring and Controlling]
       PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 237, 252, 548
       PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Monitoring and
       Controlling, 9, Task 1
       PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Planning, 6, Task 8

38. d. Identify the problem
       The first and most important is to identify the problem as a gap to be
       closed or as an objective to be achieved. Causes then are found by looking
       at the problem statement and asking why until a root cause has been iden-
       tified for which action can be taken or the reasonable possibilities on the
       diagram have been exhausted. [Planning and Monitoring and Controlling]
       PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 236, 252
       PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Monitoring and
       Controlling, 9, Task 1
       PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Planning, 6, Task 8

39. d. Scatter diagram
       Scatter diagrams are also called correlation charts as noted in the question.
       They are plot oriented pairs (X and Y). The direction of the correlation in
       them may be proportional (a positive correlation), inverse (a negative cor-
       relation), or a pattern of correlation may exist (a zero correlation). If a cor-
       relation can be established, then a regression line can be calculated and
       used to estimate how a change to the independent variable will influence
       the value of the dependent variable. It is one of the seven basic quality
       tools, a tool and technique used in Plan Quality Management and Control
       Quality. [Planning and Monitoring and Controlling]
       PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 237, 252
       PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Monitoring and
       Controlling, 9, Task 1
       PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Planning, 6, Task 8
152    PMP(R) Exam Practice Test and Study Guide


        40. b. It will enable a sharper focus on the project's value proposition
                 Reviewing the quality management plan early ensures decisions are
                 based on accurate information. The review also focuses more sharply
                 on the project's value proposition, reduction in costs, and in the fre-
                 quency of schedule overruns caused by rework. [Planning]
                 PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 241
                 PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Planning, 6, Task 8
Project Human Resource
Management


Study Hints
The Project Human Resource Management questions on the PMP(R) certification
exam focus heavily on organizational structures, roles and responsibilities of
the project manager, team building, and conflict resolution. Many of the ques-
tions are taken from the PMBOK(R) Guide and the following PMI(R) handbooks,
which have been consolidated into one publication available from PMI(R) entitled
Principles of Project Management (1997).

   Conflict Management for Project Managers by John R. Adams and
   Nicki S. Kirchof
   Organizing for Project Management by Dwayne P. Cable and John R. Adams
   Roles and Responsibilities of the Project Manager by John R. Adams and
   Brian W. Campbell
   Team Building for Project Managers by Linn C. Stuckenbruck and
   David Marshall
   The Project Manager's Work Environment: Coping with Time and Stress by
   Paul C. Dinsmore, Martin Dean Martin, and Gary T. Huettel

  Appendix X3 PMBOK(R) Guide also should be reviewed along with six other
publications it mentions:

   Essential People Skills for Project Managers by Ginger Levin and Steven
   Flannes
   Organizing Projects for Success, vol. 1 of The Human Aspects of Project
   Management by Vijay K. Verma
   Human Factors in Project Management (Revised Edition) by
   Paul C. Dinsmore

                                                                              153
154      PMP(R) Exam Practice Test and Study Guide


            Human Resource Skills for the Project Manager, vol. 2 of The Human Aspects
            of Project Management by Vijay K. Verma
            Managing the Project Team, vol. 3 of The Human Aspects of Project
            Management by Vijay K. Verma
            Seven Habits of Highly Effective People by Stephen R. Covey

             In contrast to other areas of the PMBOK(R) Guide in which commonly known
         terms are used, some terminology developed for Project Human Resource
         Management appears to be peculiar to PMI(R). (In fact, much of the terminology
         has been used in project management literature for many years, but that literature
         has not always been widely disseminated.) For example, in the area of project
         organizational structures, some experts with years of experience in the field have
         not encountered such terms or concepts as project expeditor or weak matrix.
         Accordingly, committing to memory PMI(R)'s definition and classification of the
         following subject areas is imperative:

            Project organizational structures
            Stages of team development
            Decision-making guidelines
            Influencing guidelines
            Negotiation skills
            Conflict management concepts

         In spite of the unfamiliarity of some of the terminology, most exam takers do not
         find the human resource questions on the exam difficult.
            PMI(R) views Project Human Resource Management as having four processes:
         Plan Human Resource Management, Acquire Project Team, Develop Project
         Team, and Manage Project Team. See PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, Figure 9-1 for an
         overview of this structure. Know it cold!
            Following is a list of the major Project Human Resource Management topics.
         Use it to help focus your study efforts on the areas most likely to appear on the
         exam.
                                             Project Human Resource Management      155


Major Topics
Forms of organization

   Functional
   Project expeditor
   Project coordinator
   Weak matrix
   Strong matrix
   Balanced matrix
   Projectized
   Composite

Plan Human Resource Management Plan tools and techniques

   Organization chart and position descriptions
   Hierarchical-type charts
   Matrix-based charts
   Text-oriented formats
   Networking
   Organizational theory
   Expert judgment

Develop Human Resource Management Plan outputs

   Human resource management plan
   Roles and responsibilities
   Staffing management plan
   Project organization charts

Acquire Project Team
Project manager roles and responsibilities

   Functions
   Roles
   Negotiation

Types of power
Acquisition
Multi-criteria decision analysis
Virtual teams
Project staff assignments
Resource calendars
Develop Project Team objectives
Interpersonal skills
156      PMP(R) Exam Practice Test and Study Guide


            Communication skills
            Emotional intelligence
            Conflict resolution
            Negotiation
            Influence
            Team building
            Group facilitation

         Training
         Team-building activities

            Approaches
            Stages of team development
            Goals and results of project team building
            Symptoms of poor teamwork
            The team-building process

         Ground rules for project team building
         Motivation theories

            Maslow's Hierarchy of Needs
            McGregor's Theory X and Theory Y
            Herzberg's Theory of Motivation
            Expectancy Theory
            McClelland Needs Theory

         Colocation
         Reward and recognition systems
         Performance assessment tools
         Team performance assessment

         Manage Project Team

            Project conflict
            Why conflict is unavoidable on projects
            Seven sources of conflict in project environments
            Conflict and the project life cycle
            Conflict management
             Problem solving or collaborating
             Compromising or reconciling
             Smoothing or accommodating
             Withdrawal or avoiding
             Forcing or directing
                                   Project Human Resource Management      157


Observation and conversation
Project performance appraisals
Interpersonal skills

   Leadership
   Influencing
   Effective decision making

Political and cultural awareness
Trust building
Coaching
Change requests
                                               Project Human Resource Management       159


Practice Questions
   INSTRUCTIONS: Note the most suitable answer for each multiple-choice
   question in the appropriate space on the answer sheet.

 1. You have been assigned as project manager on what could be a "bet the
    company" project. You realize that to be successful you need to exercise
    maximum control over project resources. Which form of project organization
    should you establish for this project?
   a.   Strong matrix
   b.   Projectized
   c.   Project coordinator
   d.   Weak matrix

 2. Which of the following is a ground rule for project team building?
   a. Perform frequent performance appraisals
   b. Ensure that each team member reports to his or her functional manager
      in addition to the project manager
   c. Start early
   d. Try to solve team political problems

 3. Project A is being administered using a matrix form of organization. The
    project manager reports to a senior vice president who provides visible sup-
    port to the project. In this scenario, which of the following statements best
    describes the relative power of the project manager?
   a. The project manager will probably not be challenged by project
      stakeholders.
   b. In this strong matrix, the balance of power is shifted to the functional
      line managers.
   c. In this tight matrix, the balance of power is shifted to the project
      manager.
   d. In this strong matrix, the balance of power is shifted to the project
      manager.
160      PMP(R) Exam Practice Test and Study Guide


           4. You are leading a team to recommend an equitable reward and recognition
              system for project managers. Before finalizing the plan, you want to ensure
              that executives understand the basic objective of reward systems. This objec-
              tive is to--
             a. Be comparable with the award system established for functional manag-
                ers to indicate parity and to show the importance of project management
                to the company
             b. Make the link between project performance and reward clear, explicit,
                and achievable
             c. Motivate project managers to work toward common objectives and goals
                as defined by the company
             d. Attract people to join the organization's project management career path

           5. Which of the following factors contributes the most to team communication?
             a.   External feedback
             b.   Performance appraisals
             c.   Smoothing over of team conflicts by the project manager
             d.   Colocation

           6. You are managing a virtual team. The project has been under way for sev-
              eral months, and you believe your team members do not view themselves as
              a team or a unified group. To help rectify this situation, you should--
             a. Ensure that every member of the project team uses e-mail as a form of
                communication
             b. Mandate that the team follow the vision and mission statement of his or
                her organization
             c. Enhance communications planning
             d. Provide team members with the latest in communications technology and
                mandate its use

           7. Major difficulties arise when multiple projects need to be managed in the
              functional organizational structure because of--
             a. The level of authority of the project manager
             b. Conflicts over the relative priorities of different projects in competition for
                limited resources
             c. Project team members who are focused on their functional specialty
                rather than on the project
             d. The need for the project manager to use interpersonal skills to resolve
                conflicts informally
                                                Project Human Resource Management       161


 8. Leadership is embedded in the job of a project manager and really in the
    job of every team member. Assume you are project manager with a team of
    three people who will work full-time on the project, and five people who
    will support the project on a part-time basis. All team members know one
    another and have worked together in the past. Leadership on this team is
    especially important--
   a.   As it is close to the due date for deliverables
   b.   At the beginning of the project
   c.   During the execution phase
   d.   When phase gate and performance reviews are held

 9. Your organization is characterized by hierarchical organizational structures
    with rigid rules and policies and strict supervisory controls. Individual team
    members are not expected to engage in problem solving or use creative
    approaches to plan and execute work; management does that. Your organi-
    zation is characterized by which one of the following theories?
   a.   Ouchi's Theory
   b.   McGregor's Theory X
   c.   Maslow's self-esteem level
   d.   Vroom's Expectancy Theory

10. As you prepare your human resource plan, you need to determine the skill
    and capacity required to complete the activities in the project. This should
    be documented in the--
   a.   Roles and responsibilities sections
   b.   Staffing management plan
   c.   Staff acquisition section
   d.   Competencies section

11. The primary result of effective team development is--
   a. Improved project performance
   b. An effective, smoothly running team
   c. An understanding by project team members that the project manager is
      ultimately responsible for project performance
   d. Enhancement of the ability of stakeholders to contribute as individuals
      and team members
162      PMP(R) Exam Practice Test and Study Guide


          12. The team members on your project have been complaining that they do not
              have any sense of identity as a team because they are located in different
              areas of the building. To remedy this situation, you developed a project logo
              and had it printed on T-shirts to promote the project, but this action has not
              worked. Your next step is to--
             a.   Initiate a newsletter
             b.   Create an air of mystery about the project
             c.   Establish a "team meeting room"
             d.   Issue guidelines on how team members should interact with other
                  stakeholders

          13. The project team directory is an output from which of the following
              processes?
             a.   Develop Project Team
             b.   Acquire Project Team
             c.   Develop Human Resource Management Plan
             d.   Manage Project Team

          14. You realize that leadership without management or management without
              leadership probably will produce poor project results. Which one of the fol-
              lowing key responsibilities best represents project leadership?
             a. Developing a vision and strategy and motivating people to achieve them
             b. Getting things done through other people
             c. Using charismatic power to motivate others even if they do not like the
                work
             d. Using all types of power, as appropriate, as m
                                                              otivational tools

          15. Given that you are neighbors, you and the CEO of your company have
              established a friendly personal relationship. Recently your company
              appointed you project manager for a new project that is crucial to achieving
              next year's financial targets. Which type of power available to project man-
              agers might you be able to rely upon?
             a.   Referent
             b.   Reward
             c.   Formal
             d.   Expert
                                                Project Human Resource Management         163


16. You have been a project manager for seven years. You now are managing
    the construction of a new facility that must comply with the government's
    newly issued environmental standards. You want to ensure that your team
    members are able to select methods to complete various activities on the
    project without needing to involve you in each situation. As you prepare
    your human resource management plan, you should document this informa-
    tion in which of the following--
   a.   Roles and responsibilities section
   b.   Authority section
   c.   Resource breakdown structure
   d.   Staffing management plan

17. It is important on all projects to determine when and how human resources
    will be met. Assume that you are managing a project to assess methods for
    streamlining the regulatory approval process for new medical devices in
    your government agency. Because the agency has undergone downsizing
    during the past three years, subject matter experts are in short supply. You
    must determine whether the needed subject matter experts can be acquired
    from inside the agency or whether you must use contractors. This informa-
    tion should be documented in the--
   a.   Make-or-buy decisions in the procurement management plan
   b.   Contracts management plan
   c.   Staffing management plan
   d.   Resource management plan

18. Conflicts are inevitable on projects, but if actually managed effectively, con-
    flict can help a team arrive at a better solution. One of the biggest challenges
    a project manager faces is--
   a. Determining the sources of a conflict early and having proactive solutions
      to manage them
   b. Recognizing stakeholders will have conflicting interests but using a col-
      laborative approach to resolve each conflict
   c. Knowing when a need for consensus is paramount
   d. Managing conflict when it occurs
164      PMP(R) Exam Practice Test and Study Guide


          19. As project manager, you are primarily responsible for implementing the project
              management plan by authorizing the execution of project activities. Because
              you do not work in a projectized organization, you do not have direct access to
              human resource administrative activities. Therefore you need to--
             a. Outsource these functions
             b. Prepare a project team charter that is signed off by a member of the
                human resources department to delineate responsibilities
             c. Ensure that your team is sufficiently aware of administrative requirements
                to ensure compliance
             d. Ask the head of human resources to approve your project human
                resource plan personally

         20. Constant bickering, absenteeism, and substandard performance have charac-
             terized the behavior of certain members of your team. You have planned an
             off-site retreat for the team to engage in a variety of activities. Your primary
             objective for investing time and money in this event is to improve--
             a.   Team performance
             b.   Morale
             c.   Quality
             d.   Individual performance

          21. Two team members on your project often disagree. You need a conflict reso-
              lution method that provides a long-term resolution. You decide to use which
              one of the following approaches?
             a.   Confronting
             b.   Problem solving
             c.   Collaborating
             d.   Smoothing

         22. Which of the following is an enterprise environmental factor that may influ-
             ence the development of the human resource management plan?
             a.   The organizational structure of the performing organization
             b.   Poor communication among team members
             c.   Ambiguous staffing requirements
             d.   Team morale

         23. As a project manager, you believe in using a "personal touch" to further team
             development. One approach that has proven effective toward this goal is--
             a.   Creating a team name
             b.   Providing flexible work time
             c.   Issuing a project charter
             d.   Using conversations with team members
                                               Project Human Resource Management        165


24. Your project has been under way for some time, and you are working in
    a matrix environment with only a few direct reports. However, it is your
    responsibility to--
   a. Facilitate an atmosphere conductive to success
   b. Focus on ensuring team member strengths are known and assign them to
      roles to enable the project to be completed as soon as possible
   c. Develop a recovery plan to help complete the project
   d. Provide project performance appraisals

25. You are the project manager for a two-year project that is now beginning its
    second year. The mix of team members has changed, and there is confusion
    as to roles and responsibilities. In addition, several of the completed work
    packages have not received the required sign-offs, and three work packages
    are five weeks behind schedule. To gain control of this project, you need to--
   a. Re-baseline your original human resource plan with current resource
      requirements
   b. Change to a projectized organizational structure for maximum control
      over resource assignments
   c. Work with your team to prepare a responsibility assignment matrix
   d. Create a new division of labor by assigning technical leads to the most
      critical activities

26. You are part of a team that is working to develop a new medical implant
    device. Your project manager is an expert in medical implantation devices,
    yet he continually seeks opinions from the team about a wide variety of proj-
    ect and product issues. He is also a proponent of networking in order to--
   a. Enhance project management professional development
   b. Assess the roles required for the project considering standard role
      descriptions in the organization
   c. Determine the most effective reporting relationships
   d. Provide guidelines on lead time for staffing based on lessons learned

27. The major difference between the project coordinator and project expeditor
    forms of organization is that--
   a. Strong commitment to the project usually does not exist in the project
      expeditor form of organization
   b. The project coordinator cannot personally make or enforce decisions
   c. The project expeditor acts only as an intermediary between management
      and the project team
   d. The project coordinator reports to a higher-level manager in the
      organization
166      PMP(R) Exam Practice Test and Study Guide


         28. Which one of the following represents a constraint on the Acquire Project
             Team process?
             a.   Pre-assignment of staff to the project
             b.   Economic factors
             c.   Use of outsourcing
             d.   Team member training requirements

          29. Selection criteria are often used as a tool and technique in Acquire Project
              Team. A multi-criteria decision tool is recommended. An example of a selec-
              tion criterion is--
             a.   Competency
             b.   Motivation
             c.   Attitude
             d.   Trust

         30. Your team of five people to develop a database to assess testing methods for
             listeria in ice cream has worked together before. You expect that this team
             will be a high-performing team from the beginning, but you find two team
             members seem to disagree as to the vision of the project. You meet with
             these two people and find one of them really dislikes being on the team.
             You decide to ask your sponsor if she can be reassigned, and another per-
             son added to the team. The sponsor agrees. This means--
             a. Initial establishment of roles and responsibilities change so the new per-
                son assumes the previous team member's work
             b. Your team is in the forming stage
             c. You should conduct an off-site team-building retreat
             d. You should meet with each team member and establish specific perfor-
                mance goals

          31. Your organization is adopting a project-based approach to business, which
              has been difficult. Although project teams have been created, they are little
              more than a collection of functional and technical experts who focus on
              their specialties. You are managing the company's most important project.
              As you begin this project, you must place a high priority on--
             a.   Creating an effective team
             b.   Identifying the resources needed to finish the project on time
             c.   Determining the best way to communicate status to the CEO
             d.   Establishing firm project requirements
                                                 Project Human Resource Management      167


32. A best practice in setting clear expectations regarding acceptable behavior
    by team members is to--
   a. Set ground rules
   b. Have team members sign off on the project's vision and mission
      statements
   c. Set up a RACI chart
   d. Link team member competencies to their specific responsibilities

33. Attitude surveys, specific assessments, structured interviews, ability tests,
    and focus groups are examples of--
   a.   Team performance assessments
   b.   Project performance appraisals
   c.   Personnel assessment tools
   d.   Ways to improve knowledge and skills of team members

34. Work performance reports are especially helpful in the Manage Project Team
    process because--
   a. They assess team performance to take corrective or preventive action as
      needed
   b. They assist in determining future human resource requirements
   c. They assess the degree of the project manager's authority
   d. They document and monitor who is responsible for resolving key issues
      and when resolution is needed

35. The key way for a project manager to promote optimum team performance
    in project teams whose members are not colocated is to--
   a.   Build trust
   b.   Establish a reward and recognition system
   c.   Obtain the support of the functional managers in the other locations
   d.   Exercise his or her right to control all aspects of the project

36. Hierarchical-type charts are a tool and technique for use in Plan Human
    Resource Management. Which one of the following is helpful in tracking
    project costs and can be aligned with the organization's accounting system?
   a.   RACI
   b.   RAM
   c.   RBS
   d.   OBS
168      PMP(R) Exam Practice Test and Study Guide


          37. A key benefit of the Plan Human Resource Management process is to deter-
              mine the project organization chart. Therefore, an important first step is to--
             a. Create the WBS and let it determine the project organizational structure
             b. Review the project management plan
             c. Refer to the project charter developed by top management and the proj-
                ect sponsor
             d. Develop a project schedule, including a top-down flowchart, and identify
                the functional areas to perform each task

         38. A resource histogram is useful as part of the human resource management
             plan as it--
             a.   Provides a visual representation of resource allocation
             b.   Enables a smooth transition to release resources
             c.   Sets priorities as to when scarce resources should be scheduled
             d.   Shows whether the team is colocated or virtual

          39. In addition to individual performance appraisals, team performance assess-
              ments are critical. Their evaluation may include indicators such as--
             a.   Reduced staff turnover rate
             b.   Negotiation skills
             c.   Team preferences
             d.   The ability to work well with others

         40. Determining the method and the timing of releasing team members should
             be included in the--
             a.   Staff acquisition plan
             b.   Human resource plan
             c.   Staffing management plan
             d.   Project training plan
                                     Project Human Resource Management      169


Answer Sheet

1.    a   b    c   d   21.   a   b      c    d

2.    a   b    c   d   22.   a   b      c    d

3.    a   b    c   d   23.   a   b      c    d

4.    a   b    c   d   24.   a   b      c    d

5.    a   b    c   d   25.   a   b      c    d

6.    a   b    c   d   26.   a   b      c    d

7.    a   b    c   d   27.   a   b      c    d

8.    a   b    c   d   28.   a   b      c    d

9.    a   b    c   d   29.   a   b      c    d

10.   a   b    c   d   30.   a   b      c    d

11.   a   b    c   d   31.   a   b      c    d

12.   a   b    c   d   32.   a   b      c    d

13.   a   b    c   d   33.   a   b      c    d

14.   a   b    c   d   34.   a   b      c    d

15.   a   b    c   d   35.   a   b      c    d

16.   a   b    c   d   36.   a   b      c    d

17.   a   b    c   d   37.   a   b      c    d

18.   a   b    c   d   38.   a   b      c    d

19.   a   b    c   d   39.   a   b      c    d

20.   a   b    c   d   40.   a   b      c    d
                                               Project Human Resource Management         171


Answer Key
 1. b. Projectized
        In a projectized organizational structure, all project team members
        report directly and solely to the p
                                           roject manager. He or she has com-
        plete control over these resources and, therefore, exercises more author-
        ity over them than in any other project organizational structure. The
        project manager has a great amount of independence and authority.
        Team members are often colocated, and virtual collaboration techniques
        are often used to accomplish the benefits of the colocated teams. Refer
        to Figure 2-5 in the PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013 for an example. [Planning]
        PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 22, 25
        PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Planning, 6, Task 5

 2. c. Start early
        Starting the team-building process early in the project is crucial for
        setting the right tone and preventing bad habits and patterns from
        developing. Recognize that although it is essential at the front end of a
        project, it is ongoing. Changes in the project's environment will occur
        and to manage them effectively a continued or renewed team-building
        effort is required. It is a tool and technique in the Develop Project Team
        process. It can vary from a five-minute agenda item in a staff meeting
        to an off-site retreat designed to improve interpersonal relationships. Its
        objective is to help team members work together effectively. [Executing]
        Adams, J.R., et al. Principles of Project Management, 1997, 137
        PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 276, 514
        PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Executing, 8, Task 1

 3. d. In this strong matrix, the balance of power is shifted to the project
       manager.
        The project manager's ability to influence project decisions increases
        the higher up he or she--and the person to whom he or she reports--
        is placed in the organization. This reporting relationship in this example
        shows it is a strong matrix. In the strong matrix, the project manager's
        authority ranges from moderate to high. Therefore, it resembles some
        characteristics of the projectized organization because it has full-time
        project managers with considerable authority and full-time project
        administrative staff. Refer to Figure 2-4 in the PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013 for
        an example. [Planning]
        PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 22-24
        Verma, V.K, Organizing for Project Success, 1995, 156-157
        PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Planning, 6, Task 5
172      PMP(R) Exam Practice Test and Study Guide


           4. b. Make the link between project performance and reward clear, explicit,
                 and achievable
                   Reward and recognition systems are formal management actions that
                   provide an incentive to behave in a particular way, usually with respect
                   to achieving certain goals. Such systems are described in the staff-
                   ing management plan. A best practice is to give the team recognition
                   throughout the life cycle rather than waiting until the project is com-
                   plete. Clear criteria for rewards and a planned system for their use help
                   promote and reinforce desired behavior. The most effective systems are
                   based on activities under a person's control. They are a tool and tech-
                   nique in the Develop Project Team process because it involves recog-
                   nizing and rewarding desirable behavior. Note that a reward given to
                   an individual can be effective only if it satisfies a need the individual
                   values. They are typically given as part of performance appraisals in the
                   Manage Project Team process. [Planning and Executing]
                   PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 266, 277
                   PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Planning, 6, Task 5
                   PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Executing, 8, Task 1

           5. d. Colocation
                   Colocation is the placement of some, many, or all of the most active
                   team members in the same physical location to enhance their abil-
                   ity to perform as a team, primarily by increasing communication as to
                   improve working relationships and productivity. It is a tool and tech-
                   nique in the Develop Project Team process and can be called a "tight
                   matrix". It can be temporary or for the entire project. [Executing]
                   PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 277, 532
                   PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Executing, 8, Task 1

           6. c. Enhance communications planning
                   Because the dispersed project team does not share the same physical
                   space each day, the possibility for misunderstandings, isolationism, dif-
                   ficulty in sharing information, and the cost of technology can be key
                   issues. The project manager must enhance communications planning in
                   the virtual team as it requires even more communication than colocated
                   teams. Additional time also may be needed to set expectations, deter-
                   mine how best to resolve conflicts, involve people in making decisions,
                   understand cultural differences, and share credit for success. [Executing]
                   PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 271
                   PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Executing, 8, Task 1
                                               Project Human Resource Management          173


7. b. Conflicts over the relative priorities of different projects in competition
      for limited resources
       When a finite group of resources must be distributed across multiple
       projects, conflicts in work assignments occur. Other sources of conflict
       are scheduling and personal work styles. Conflict management is a tool
       and technique in the Manage Project Team process. Successful conflict
       management results in greater productivity and more positive work-
       ing relationships. The success of project managers in managing project
       teams often depends on their ability to resolve conflict since conflict is
       inevitable in the project environment. [Executing]
       PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 282-283, 518
       PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Executing, 8, Task 1

8. b. At the beginning of the project
       Leadership focuses the efforts of a group of people toward a common
       goal to enable them to work as a team. It is known as getting work done
       through others. It requires respect and trust as key elements. While it is
       important at all phases of the project, it is crucial when a project begins,
       even in this situation where the people know one another and have
       worked together before. At the beginning, it emphasizes communicat-
       ing the vision of the project and then motivating and inspiring others to
       achieve high performance, ensuring success. Successful projects require
       strong leadership skills, [Planning and Executing]
       PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 284, 513
       PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Planning, 6, Task 5
       PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Executing, 8, Task 1

9. b. McGregor's Theory X
       McGregor observed two types of managers and classified them by their
       perceptions of workers. Theory X managers thought that workers were
       lazy, needed to be watched and supervised closely, and were irresponsi-
       ble. Theory Y managers thought that, given the correct conditions, workers
       could be trusted to seek responsibility and work hard at their jobs. Ideally,
       the Theory X approach is not followed, but instead a flexible leadership
       style is used that adapts to the changes in the team's maturity throughout
       the project life cycle. However, it must be recognized that different orga-
       nizational structures have different individual responses, individual perfor-
       mance results, and personal relationship characteristics. [Planning]
       McGregor, D., The Human Side of Enterprise, 1960, 33-35
       Verma, V.K., Human Resource Skills for the Project Manager, 1996, 70-71
       PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 263
       PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Planning, 6, Task 5
174      PMP(R) Exam Practice Test and Study Guide


          10. d. Competency section
                   The competency section of this plan describes the skills and capaci-
                   ties required to complete activities within the project constraints. When
                   team members do not have the required competencies, project per-
                   formance may be jeopardized, and the project manager must have
                   proactive responses to handle these situations such as training, hiring,
                   schedule changes, or scope changes. [Planning]
                   PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 264
                   PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Planning, 6, Task 5

          11. a. Improved project performance
                   Improved project performance not only increases the likelihood of meet-
                   ing project objectives, it also creates a positive team experience con-
                   tributing to the enhancement of team capabilities. It results in improved
                   teamwork, enhanced people skills and competencies, motivated employ-
                   ees, reduced staff turnover rates, and improved overall team perfor-
                   mance. It is a benefit of the Develop Project Team process. [Executing]
                   PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 273
                   PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Executing, 8, Task 1

          12. c. Establish a "team meeting room"
                   Colocating team members, even on a temporary basis, enhances com-
                   munications, thereby contributing to improved project performance. In
                   addition, the team meeting room (often called a "war room") provides
                   a sense of identity to the project team and raises the visibility of the
                   project within the organization. This room can serve as a place to post
                   schedules and other conveniences that enhance communication. If a
                   virtual team is used, a virtual team room or war room can be set up if
                   the technology is available. [Executing]
                   PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 277
                   PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Executing, 8, Task 1

          13. b. Acquire Project Team
                   The project team directory is part of project staff assignments, an out-
                   put from the Acquire Project Team process. Within staff assignments,
                   memos to project team members and names inserted into other parts
                   of the project management plan such as the project organization chart
                   and schedules are included. Other outputs are resource calendars and
                   updates to the project management plan. [Executing]
                   PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 272
                   PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Executing, 8, Task 1
                                              Project Human Resource Management        175


14. d. Developing a vision and strategy and motivating people to achieve them
       Leadership involves developing a vision of the future and strategies to
       achieve that vision, positioning people to carry out the vision, and help-
       ing people energize themselves to overcome any barriers to change and
       achieve high performance. Throughout the project, leaders are respon-
       sible for establishing and maintaining this vision, strategy, and commu-
       nicating about it. It is important to lead by example and follow through
       with commitments. [Executing]
       PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 284, 513-515
       PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Executing, 8, Task 1

15. a. Referent
       Referent power is based on a less powerful person's identification with
       a more powerful person. This type of power is useful in terms of per-
       suasion and helps the project manager exert influence over individuals
       from whom he or she needs support. French and Bell, in 1973, formal-
       ized the five sources of power. In addition, to referent as described in
       this answer, reward is power in which the project manager can give
       team members rewards and recognition, leading to this section as a
       tool and technique in Develop Project Team. Coercive power is a leader
       who makes it clear that if team members do not comply with the orga-
       nization's or the leader's mandate, there will be repercussions; com-
       parable to McGregor in the discussion of Theory X. Legitimate power
       is shown by a project manager that he or she has a legitimate right to
       influence others and expects others to follow his or her approach in the
       project; in a way it supports influencing skills, a tool and technique in
       Manage Project Team. Expert power is when one uses his or her expe-
       rience or knowledge to influence others, again supporting influencing
       skills. By recognizing the project manager and other leader's sources
       of power, the team member then can consider appropriate ways to
       best work with the project manager for project success, As noted in the
       PMBOK(R) Guide, it is necessary to apply power skillfully and cautiously
       to ensure long-term collaboration. [Planning]
       Adams, J.R., et al., Principles of Project Management, 1997, 174-180
       Levin, G., Interpersonal Skills for Portfolio, Program, and Project
       Managers, 2010, 162-167
       PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 277, 284, 515
       PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Executing, 8, Task 1
176      PMP(R) Exam Practice Test and Study Guide


          16. b. Authority section
                   Authority refers to the right to apply project resources, make decisions,
                   and sign approvals. Examples include selecting methods to complete
                   activities, quality acceptance, and responding to variances in the proj-
                   ect. The individual authority of each team member should match their
                   individual responsibilities; when this is done it is easier for the team
                   members to do their work. This is documented in the authority section
                   in the human resource management plan. [Planning]
                   PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 264
                   PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Planning, 6, Task 5

          17. c. Staffing management plan
                   The staffing management plan is part of the human resource manage-
                   ment plan. One section of it involves staff acquisition. Among other
                   things, this section includes whether the human resources will come
                   from within the organization or from external, contracted sources.
                   These data then help to plan the acquisition of project team members.
                   This section also includes whether the team members will be colocated
                   or virtual, the cost associated for each level of expertise needed for the
                   project, and the level of assistance the human resources department and
                   the functional managers can provide to the project team. [Planning]
                   PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 265
                   PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Planning, 6, Task 5

          18. d. Managing conflict when it occurs
                   In doing so the project manager draws on the other interpersonal skills
                   to lead the team to a successful resolution of the situation. This means
                   project managers must develop skills and have the experience to adapt
                   their personal conflict management style to the situation. It also is
                   necessary to focus on building trust in the project environment and by
                   doing so to engage people to find a positive resolution to the situation.
                   Conflict management is a tool and technique in the Manage Project
                   Team process. [Executing]
                   PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 282-283
                   PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Executing, 8, Task 1
                                              Project Human Resource Management        177


19. c. Ensure that your team is sufficiently aware of administrative require-
       ments to ensure compliance
       A projectized work environment is unusual because project managers
       rarely have every function under their control. However, compliance is
       a section in the project's staffing management plan, which is part of the
       project's human resource management plan. This section includes strat-
       egies for complying with any applicable government regulations, union
       contracts, or other established human resource policies, leading to this
       question where the key words are "direct access to human resource
       administrative activities". By including this section, the team can best
       recognize what is necessary in this environment. [Planning]
       PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 22, 267
       PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Planning, 6, Task 5

20. a. Team performance
       Team development leads to improved team performance, which ulti-
       mately results in improved project performance. Improvements in team
       performance can come from many sources and can affect many areas
       of project performance. For example, improved individual skill levels,
       such as enhanced technical competence, may enable team members
       to perform their assigned activities more effectively. Team development
       efforts have greater benefit when conducted early but should take place
       throughout the project life cycle. Team building activities are a tool and
       technique in the Develop Project Team process and are considered an
       ongoing process, crucial to project success. Team performance assess-
       ments are an output of this project in which team building is noted as
       an activity that can increase team performance, as well as the likelihood
       of meeting project objectives. [Executing]
       PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 274, 278
       PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Executing, 8, Task 1

21. c. Collaborating
       Collaborating or problem solving is an effective technique for managing
       conflict when a project is too important to be compromised. It involves
       incorporating multiple insights and viewpoints from people with different
       perspectives and offers a good opportunity to learn from others. It pro-
       vides a long-term resolution. It requires a cooperative attitude and open
       dialogue that typically leads to consensus and commitment. [Executing]
       PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 283, 518
       Verma, V.K., Human Resource Skills for the Project Manager, 1996, 119-120
       PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Executing, 8, Task 1
178      PMP(R) Exam Practice Test and Study Guide


          22. a. The organizational structure of the performing organization
                   Enterprise environmental factors can influence the Develop Human
                   Resource Management process. The organizational structure of the per-
                   forming organization determines whether the project manager's role is a
                   strong one (as in a strong matrix) or a weak one (as in a weak matrix).
                   Other examples of enterprise environmental factors are the organiza-
                   tion's culture, geographic dispersion of team members, existing human
                   resources, personnel administration functions, and marketplace condi-
                   tions. [Planning]
                   PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 260
                   PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Planning, 6, Task 5

          23. d. Using conversations with team members
                   Project managers can show interest in their team members by commu-
                   nicating with them regularly. Observation of their work and conversa-
                   tions with them are effective approaches to stay in touch with them
                   and gauge their attitudes. Both observation and conversation, a tool
                   and technique in Manage Project Team, also enables a way to monitor
                   project performance, accomplishments that are a source of pride to the
                   team members, and any interpersonal issues so proactive actions can be
                   taken to best resolve them. [Executing]
                   PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 282
                   PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Executing, 8, Task 1

          24. d. Provide project performance appraisals
                   As a tool and technique in Manage Project Team, performance apprais-
                   als can clarify roles and responsibilities, provide feedback to team mem-
                   bers, discover and resolve any unknown or unresolved issues, develop
                   individual training plans to increase competencies, and establish spe-
                   cific goals for future time periods. The need for formal or informal
                   performance appraisals depends on the complexity of the project and
                   its length, as in this question. [Executing]
                   PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 282
                   PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Executing, 8, Task 1
                                             Project Human Resource Management        179


25. c. Work with your team to prepare a responsibility assignment matrix
       The responsibility assignment matrix (RAM) defines project roles and
       responsibilities in terms of work packages and activities. It can be used
       to show who is a participant, who is accountable, who handles review,
       who provides input, and who must sign off on specific work packages
       or project phases. RAMs can be at different levels. A high-level RAM
       defines what the project team is responsible for within each WBS com-
       ponent, and lower-level RAMs are used within the team as described
       above in this rationale. It ensures there is only one person accountable
       for any single task to avoid confusion over responsibilities. An example
       of a RAM is a RACI (responsible, accountable, consult, and inform)
       chart, as shown in Figure 9-5 in the PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013. While these
       matrix-based charts are an input to Plan Human Resource Management,
       a best practice is to review them regularly, especially as new people
       join the project and others leave or if there are changes to the work
       packages and their associated activities. [Planning]
       PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 262, 559
       PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Planning, 6, Task 5

26. a. Enhance project management professional development
       Networking is an input to Plan Human Resource Management and is the
       formal and informal interaction with others in the organization, indus-
       try, or professional environment. It is a constructive way to understand
       political and interpersonal factors that may impact staffing management
       decisions. It is a useful technique at the beginning of the project and
       also can be an effective way to enhance project management profes-
       sional development during the project and even after the project ends.
       The other answers to this question refer to the use of expert judgment
       in developing the human resource management plan. [Planning]
       PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 263
       PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Planning, 6, Task 5
180    PMP(R) Exam Practice Test and Study Guide


          27. d. The project coordinator reports to a higher-level manager in the
                 organization
                  The relative position of the project coordinator in the organization is
                  thought to lead to an increased level of authority and responsibility. The
                  project coordinator also tends to have more power to make decisions
                  and has some authority. The project expediter cannot personally make
                  or enforce decisions. [Executing]
                  Adams, J.R., et al., Principles of Project Management, 1997, 15-17
                  Verma, V.K., Organizing Projects for Success, 1995, 153-156
                  PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 23
                  PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Executing, 8, Task 1

          28. b. Economic factors
                  During the process of Acquire Project Team, if human resources are not
                  available because of constraints, the project manager may be required
                  to assign alternative resources. Examples of constraints are economic
                  factors or previous assignments to other projects. The project manager
                  then may need to assign people who perhaps have lower competencies,
                  provided there is no violation of legal, regulatory, mandatory, or other
                  specific criteria. [Executing]
                  PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 268
                  PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Executing, 8, Task 1

          29. c. Attitude
                  Attitude is used to determine one's ability to work with others as a
                  cohesive team. Other selection criteria are availability, cost, experi-
                  ence, ability, knowledge, skills, and international factors. A multi-criteria
                  approach is useful as the criteria then are weighted according to the
                  importance of the needs within the team. [Executing]
                  PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 271-272
                  PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Executing, 8, Task 1
                                              Project Human Resource Management        181


30. b. Your team is in the forming stage
       Even if team members have worked together previously, it cannot be
       assumed they will immediately be a high-performing team. According
       to the Tuchman team development model, all teams have a forming
       stage in which the team meets and learns about the project and their
       formal roles and responsibilities. At this time, team members are inde-
       pendent and not as open in this phase. This model further goes on to
       the storming stage, norming stage, performing stage, and adjourning
       stage. However, even if the team is in the norming or performing stage,
       if a team member leaves or a new person joins, the team will revert
       back to the forming stage. This model is part of team-building activities,
       a tool and technique in the Develop Project Team process. [Executing]
       PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 276
       PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Executing, 8, Task 1

31. a. Creating an effective team
       An effective team is critical to project success, but such a team is not
       born spontaneously. In early project phases, it is vitally important for
       the project manager to place a high priority on initiating and imple-
       menting the team-building process. It is the purpose of the Acquire
       Project Team process, which has as its key benefit outlining and guiding
       the team selection process and resource assignment to obtain a success-
       ful team. Insufficient resources or capabilities decrease the probability
       of success and may even led to project termination. [Executing]
       PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 267-268
       Verma, V.K., Managing the Project Team, 1997, 137
       PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Executing, 8, Task 1

32. a. Set ground rules
       Ground rules are a tool and technique in the Develop Project Team pro-
       cess. Early commitment to clear guidelines decreases misunderstandings
       and increases productivity. Discussing how they are to address such
       areas as a code of conduct, communications, working together, or meet-
       ing etiquette are examples of setting ground rules. This allows team
       members to discover values that are important to one another. Once the
       ground rules are set, all project team members have the responsibility
       to see they are followed. [Executing]
       PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 277
       PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Executing, 8, Task 1
182      PMP(R) Exam Practice Test and Study Guide


          33. c. Personnel assessment tools
                   Personnel assessment tools are a tool and technique in the Develop
                   Project Team process. They are used to give the project manager and
                   the team members' insight into areas of strength and areas needing
                   improvement. They help the project manager assess team members'
                   preferences and aspirations, how they process and organize informa-
                   tion, how they make decisions, and how they prefer to interact with
                   others. They can help provide improved understanding, trust, commit-
                   ment, and communications among team members, leading to a more
                   productive team. [Executing]
                   PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 278
                   PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Executing, 8, Task 1

          34. b. They assist in determining future human resource requirements
                   Work performance reports are an input in the Manage Project Team
                   process. They provide information on the current project status com-
                   pared to forecasts. Performance areas that can help with team manage-
                   ment include results from schedule, cost, and quality control and scope
                   validation. The information from these reports then assists in determin-
                   ing future human resource requirements, recognition and rewards, and
                   updates to the staffing management plan. [Executing]
                   PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 281
                   PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Executing, 8, Task 1

          35. a. Build trust
                   Whether a team is colocated or virtual, it is essential to build trust for
                   effective team leadership. Without trust, it is difficult to establish the
                   positive relationships in the team, and if trust is compromised, rela-
                   tionships deteriorate, people disengage, and collaboration may be
                   impossible. It is particularly essential in the virtual team in which team
                   members who are physically separate from one another tend not to
                   know each other well. They have few opportunities to develop trust
                   in the traditional way, and they tend to communicate poorly with one
                   another. Trust then must become the foundation upon which all team-
                   building activities are built. Without trust, it is hard to even know if a
                   virtual team member is working productively on the project or is doing
                   other work, knowledge transfer becomes more difficult if not impossi-
                   ble, and communications planning is hindered. Virtual teams are a tool
                   and technique in the Acquire Project Team process. [Executing]
                   PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 271, 517-518
                   PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Executing, 8, Task 1
                                              Project Human Resource Management         183


36. c. RBS
        While the WBS shows how project deliverables are broken down into
        work packages to show high-level areas of responsibility, the organiza-
        tional breakdown structure (OBS) is arranged according to the organiza-
        tion's departments, units, or teams with the work packages listed under
        each one as appropriate. The resource breakdown structure (RBS) is a
        hierarchical list of resources related by category and resource type used
        to facilitate and control the work of the project. Each descending lower
        level represents an increasing detailed description of the resource unit
        small enough to be used in conjunction with the WBS to enable the
        work to be planned, monitored, and controlled. The RBS helps track
        project costs and can be aligned with the organization's accounting sys-
        tem. It contains all resources, not solely people. [Planning]
        PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 261
        PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Planning, 6, Task 5

37. b. Review the project management plan
        Other benefits of this process are to establish project roles and respon-
        sibilities and prepare the staffing management plan for the timetable for
        staff acquisition and release. The project management plan is the first
        input in this process to develop the human resource management plan.
        It contains key information that shows the project life cycle and the pro-
        cesses applied to each phase, how the work will be done to accomplish
        objectives, a change management and a configuration management
        plan, how integrity of the project baselines will be maintained, and
        needs and methods of communication. [Planning]
        PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 258-259
        PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Planning, 6, Task 5

38. a. Provides a visual representation of resource allocation
        The resource histogram is contained in the resource calendars section
        of the staffing management plan, which is part of the human resource
        management plan. It illustrates the number of hours a resource will be
        needed each week or month during a project. It can include a horizon-
        tal line that represents the maximum number of hours available for a
        particular resource. Bars that extend beyond this line show the need
        for a resource optimization strategy such as adding more resources or
        extending the schedule. Refer to Figure 9-6 in the PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013
        for an example. [Planning]
        PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 265
        PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Planning, 6, Task 5
184      PMP(R) Exam Practice Test and Study Guide


          39. a. Reduced staff turnover rate
                   Team performance assessments are an output of the Develop Product
                   Team process. In addition to the answer, other indicators of the team's
                   effectiveness include: improvements in skills that allow individuals to
                   perform assignments more effectively, improvements in competencies
                   so the team performs better as a team, and increased team cohesiveness
                   enabling team members to transfer knowledge and openly and help
                   one another improve overall project performance. [Executing]
                   PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 278-279
                   PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Executing, 8, Task 1

          40. c. Staffing management plan
                   The staffing management plan is a document that describes when and
                   how human resources will become part of the project team and when
                   they will return to their organizational units. It addresses how staff
                   members will be acquired, how long they will remain on the project,
                   how and when they will be released, training needs, and other impor-
                   tant aspects of forming and disbanding the team. When team mem-
                   bers are released from a project, the costs associated with them are
                   no longer charged to the project, thus reducing project costs. Morale is
                   improved when there is a smooth transition to another project or one in
                   progress. The staff release plan helps mitigate human resource risks that
                   may occur at the end of the project. [Planning]
                   PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 266
                   PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Planning, 6, Task 5
Project Communications
Management


Study Hints
The Project Communications Management questions on the PMP(R) certification
exam are relatively basic and are taken primarily from the PMBOK(R) Guide and
other PMI(R)-published reference materials. Common sense and your own experi-
ence will play a large role in your ability to answer the questions on this topic.
There will be questions that test your specific knowledge of PMBOK(R) Guide
terms and concepts. However, there will also be many general questions that
require you to choose the "best" answer.
    The questions focus on formal and informal communication, verbal versus
written communication, performance reporting, and management styles. PMI(R)
considers management style to be an essential component of how a project man-
ager communicates.
    The PMI(R) handbooks (which are now included in Principles of Project
Management, PMI(R), 1997), Roles and Responsibilities of the Project Manager
by John R. Adams and Brian W. Campbell, Conflict Management for Project
Managers by John R. Adams and Nicki S. Kirchof, and Team Building for Project
Managers by Linn C. Stuckenbruck and David Marshall, should be studied thor-
oughly for this section of the PMP(R) certification exam. Also review Appendix X3
in the PMBOK (R) Guide.
    The PMI(R) publication Human Resource Skills for the Project Manager, which
is Volume 2 of The Human Aspects of Project Management by Vijay K. Verma,
is another useful reference. In these publications, many mention the impor-
tance of the kickoff meeting one of the most effective mechanisms in Project
Communications Management. The nature and purpose of this meeting are
discussed in Team Building for Project Managers but it is not discussed in the
PMBOK (R) Guide. However, it is Task 12 in Planning in the ECO.


                                                                               185
186      PMP(R) Exam Practice Test and Study Guide


            PMI(R) views Project Communications Management as a process consisting of
         three elements: plan communications management, manage communications,
         and control communications. See PMBOK(R) Guide Figure 10-1 for an overview of
         this structure. Know this chart thoroughly.
            Following is a list of the major Project Communications Management topics.
         Use it to help focus your study efforts on the areas most likely to appear on the
         exam.
                                          Project Communications Management    187


Major Topics
Importance of project communications management
Communication dimensions
Communication channels
Communication skills

Plan communications

   The communications model
   Encode
   Transmit message
   Decode
   Acknowledge
   Feedback/response
   Communications requirements analysis
   Communications technology
   Communication methods
   Meetings
   Communications management plan

Manage communications

   Sender-feedback model
   Choice of media
   Writing style
   Meeting management techniques
   Presentation techniques
   Facilitation techniques
   Listening techniques
   Information management systems
   Performance reporting
   Simple
   Elaborate
   Project communications

Barriers to communication
Control communications

   Issue log
   Meetings
   Work performance information
   Change requests
                                              Project Communications Management    189


Practice Questions
   INSTRUCTIONS: Note the most suitable answer for each multiple-choice
   question in the appropriate space on the answer sheet.


 1. The communications management process goes beyond distributing relevant
    information as it--
   a. Focuses on establishing working relationships and standard formats for
      global communication among stakeholders
   b. Ensures information being communicated has been appropriately gener-
      ated, received, and understood
   c. Establishes individual and group responsibilities and accountabilities for
      communication management
   d. Discusses how sensitive communications are to be handled

 2. One purpose of the communications management plan is to provide infor-
    mation about the--
   a. Methods that will be used to convey information
   b. Methods that will be used for releasing team members from the project
      when they are no longer needed
   c. Project organization and stakeholder responsibility relationships
   d. Experience and skill levels of each team member

 3. Project managers for international projects should recognize key issues in
    cross-cultural settings and place special emphasis on--
   a. Establishing a performance reporting system
   b. Using good communication planning
   c. Establishing and following a production schedule for information distribu-
      tion to avoid responding to requests for information between scheduled
      communications
   d. Using translation services for formal, written project reports

 4. You are managing a project with team members located at customer sites on
    three different continents. As you plan communications with your stakehold-
    ers, you should review--
   a.   Stakeholder management plan
   b.   Stakeholder register
   c.   Communications model
   d.   Communications channels
190    PMP(R) Exam Practice Test and Study Guide


         5. Having worked previously on projects as a team member, you are pleased to
            now be the project manager to develop a new process to ensure that soft-
            ware projects in your IT department are considered a success and are not
            late or over budget. However, many of your team members are new to the
            organization. As you work to establish a high-performing team, you realize
            the importance of--
           a.   Mentoring
           b.   Coaching
           c.   Moving quickly through the forming and storming stages
           d.   Safeguarding information

         6. As a project manager, you try to use empathic listening skills to help under-
            stand another person's frame of reference. In following this approach, you
            should--
           a.   Mimic the content of the message
           b.   Probe, then evaluate the content
           c.   Evaluate the content, then advise
           d.   Rephrase the content and reflect the feeling

         7. Statements of organizational policies and philosophies, position descriptions,
            and constraints are examples of--
           a.   Formal communication
           b.   Lateral communication
           c.   External communication
           d.   Horizontal communication

         8. You have decided to organize a study group of other project managers in
            your organization to help prepare for the PMP(R) exam. What type of commu-
            nication activity are you employing in your efforts to organize this group?
           a.   Horizontal
           b.   Vertical
           c.   Official
           d.   External

         9. Your CEO just sent you an e-mail asking you to make a presentation on
            your project, which has been in progress for 18 months, to over 50 identified
            internal and external stakeholders. You have been conducting such presenta-
            tions and holding meetings regularly on this important project. You should
            begin by--
           a.   Defining the audience
           b.   Determining the objective
           c.   Deciding on the general form of the presentation
           d.   Circulating issues to be discussed
                                               Project Communications Management      191


10. You are responsible for a project in your organization that has multiple inter-
    nal customers. Because many people in your organization are interested in
    this project, you realize the importance of--
   a.   Conducting a stakeholder analysis to assess information needs
   b.   Performing communications planning early
   c.   Determining the communications requirements of the customers
   d.   Having an expert on communications management and customer rela-
        tionship management on your team

11. Project managers spend a great deal of time communicating with the team,
    the stakeholders, the client, and the sponsor. One can easily see the chal-
    lenges involved, especially if one team member must communicate a techni-
    cal concept to another team member in a different country. The first step in
    this process is to--
   a.   Encode the message
   b.   Decode the message
   c.   Determine the feedback loops
   d.   Determine the medium

12. On your project, scope changes, constraints, assumptions, integration and
    interface requirements, and overlapping roles and responsibilities pose com-
    munications challenges. The presence of communication barriers is most
    likely to lead to--
   a.   Reduced productivity
   b.   Increased hostility
   c.   Low morale
   d.   Increased conflict

13. The most common communication problem that occurs during negotiation is
    that--
   a.   Each side may misinterpret what the other side has said
   b.   Each side may give up on the other side
   c.   One side may try to confuse the other side
   d.   One side may be too busy thinking about what to say next to hear what
        is being said
192    PMP(R) Exam Practice Test and Study Guide


          14. You finally have been appointed project manager for a major company
              project. One of your first activities as project manager will be to create the
              communications management plan. As you match the stakeholder with the
              appropriate communication methods for that stakeholder, you could use any
              one of the following methods EXCEPT--
             a.   Interactive communications
             b.   Passive communications
             c.   Pull communications
             d.   Push communications

          15. As an output of Plan Communications, it may be necessary to update the
              project documents, which include the--
             a.   Stakeholder register
             b.   Corporate policies, procedures, and processes
             c.   Knowledge management system
             d.   Stakeholder management plan

          16. Sample attributes of a communications management plan include which one
              of the following?
             a.   Roles
             b.   Responsibilities
             c.   Ethics
             d.   Authority

          17. A skill in negotiating is--
             a.   Active listening
             b.   Attentive listening
             c.   Getting to "yes"
             d.   Using confrontation to solve problems

          18. The key benefit of the Control Communications process is--
             a. Sharing best practices with other project teams in the organization with
                lessons learned
             b. Ensuring the information needs of stakeholders are met
             c. Ensuring an optimal information flow among communication participants
             d. Providing stakeholders with information about resolved issues, approved
                status, and project status
                                                Project Communications Management       193


19. The issue log is useful in Control Communications because it--
   a. Provides what has happened and is a platform for subsequent
      communications
   b. Includes the project's risk register
   c. Organizes and summarizes information gathered
   d. Serves as an information management system for communications
      management

20. As head of the PMO, you will receive performance reports for all major
    projects. You decided to set a guideline for project managers as performance
    reporting should--
   a.   Collect work performance information on the status of deliverables
   b.   Provide earned value data for project forecasting
   c.   Provide information at an appropriate level for each audience
   d.   Focus on cost and schedule variances rather than scope, resources,
        quality, and risks

21. A simple performance report provides information on--
   a.   Percent complete
   b.   Customer satisfaction
   c.   Unacceptable variances
   d.   Scope creep

22. Communication is important when setting and managing expectations with
    the stakeholders. Which one of the following statements is NOT true regard-
    ing the importance of communications within a project?
   a. Communications is one of the single biggest contributors to project suc-
      cess or failure.
   b. Project resources should be spent primarily on communicating informa-
      tion that leads to project success.
   c. Effective communications includes awareness of communication styles,
      cultural issues, relationships, personalities, and the context of the situation
   d. Listening is part of communicating and is a way to gain insight into prob-
      lem areas, managing conflicts, and making decisions.

23. In person-to-person communication, messages are sent on verbal levels and
    nonverbal levels simultaneously. To communicate effectively, the project
    manager should be--
   a.   Aware of the communication styles of the other parties
   b.   Aware of his or her own preferred communication style
   c.   Able to apply a flexible style to meet audience requirements
   d.   Aware of non-verbal communications
194    PMP(R) Exam Practice Test and Study Guide


        24. As an output from Control Communications, it may be necessary to update
            the--
           a.   Identified risks
           b.   Forecasts
           c.   Corporate policies, procedures, and processes
           d.   Knowledge management system

        25. In project communications, the first step in a written communication is to--
           a. Analyze the facts and assumptions that have a bearing on the purpose of
              the message
           b. Gather thoughts or ideas
           c. Develop a logical sequence of the topics to be addressed
           d. Establish the basic purpose of the message

       26. A communications management plan includes which one of the following
           sample contents?
           a.   Issues
           b.   Escalation processes, including time frames and the management chains
           c.   Dimensions
           d.   Project assumptions and constraints

        27. Your organization has decided to use project management for all of its
            endeavors. It has established a Center of Excellence for Project Management
            to support the movement into management by projects and has appointed
            you as its director. Since you work in a matrix environment, which of the
            following types of communications is the most essential for success?
           a.   Upward
           b.   Horizontal
           c.   Downward
           d.   Diagonal

       28. You have heard recently that the client calls your progress reports the "Code
           of Hammurabi" because they seem to be written in hieroglyphics and are
           completely indecipherable to all but an antiquities scholar. This situation
           could have been avoided by--
           a. Informing the client at the start of the project about the types of reports
              they will receive
           b. Using risk management techniques to identify client issues
           c. Hiring an expert report writer to prepare standard reports
           d. Engaging in communications planning
                                              Project Communications Management    195


29. Assume on your project you have identified 250 stakeholders located in
    three continents and of these 250, you have determined that 200 of them
    will be actively involved and interested in your project. Therefore, as you
    determine an appropriate communication method, your best approach is--
   a.   Elaborate status reports
   b.   Simple status reports
   c.   Knowledge repositories
   d.   E-mails

30. You want to ensure that the information you collect showing project prog-
    ress and status is meaningful to stakeholders. You want to combine the type
    and format of the stakeholder's information needs with an analysis of the
    value of the information. You will document this information in the--
   a.   Communications register
   b.   Stakeholder register
   c.   Stakeholder management plan
   d.   Communications management plan

31. Work performance information is an output of which process?
   a.   Manage risks
   b.   Manage communications
   c.   Control communications
   d.   Report performance

32. Assume you want to optimize the work performance reports you will use to
    manage communications. You should do so by--
   a. Determining the most appropriate choice of communications media
   b. Setting different communications techniques for different stakeholder
      groups
   c. Ensuring the information is consistent with regulations and standards
   d. Ensuring comprehensiveness, accuracy, and availability

33. Information received from stakeholders concerning project operations can
    be distributed and used to modify or improve future performance of the
    project. This modification or improvement is done as an update to organiza-
    tional process assets during which of the following processes?
   a.   Plan communications management
   b.   Distribute information
   c.   Manage communications
   d.   Report performance
196      PMP(R) Exam Practice Test and Study Guide


         34. General management skills relevant to the Manage Communications process
             include--
             a.   Operational planning
             b.   Organizational behavior
             c.   Setting and managing expectations
             d.   Influencing the organization

          35. Changes in the report formats and lessons learned documents process
              should trigger changes to the--
             a. Project management plan and performance reporting system
             b. Integrated change control system and the communications management
                plan
             c. Monitor and control project process and the project management plan
             d. Organizational process assets updates

         36. One way to determine how to best update and communicate project perfor-
             mance and respond to stakeholder information requests is to--
             a.   Review the effectiveness of the communications management plan
             b.   Set up a portal
             c.   Hold meetings
             d.   Distribute performance reports

          37. The purpose of work performance data in Control Communications is to
              present results of comparative analysis to the--
             a.   Performance measurement baseline
             b.   Communications management plan
             c.   Stakeholder management plan
             d.   Deliverable status

         38. Because communications planning often is linked tightly with enterprise
             environmental factors, which one of the following statements is true?
             a. The project's organizational structure has a major effect on the project's
                communications requirements.
             b. Standardized guidelines, work instructions, and performance measure-
                ment criteria are key items to consider.
             c. Procedures for approving and issuing work authorizations should be
                taken into consideration.
             d. Criteria and guidelines to tailor standard processes to the specific needs
                of the project should be stated explicitly.
                                            Project Communications Management    197


39. You are working on a project with 15 stakeholders. The number of commu-
    nication channels on this project is--
   a.   15
   b.   105
   c.   210
   d.   225

40. Which of the following formulas calculates the number of communication
    channels in a project?
      n(n - 1)
   a.
          2
      n -1
       2
   b.
         2
      n -1
       2
   c.
         n
      2 -2
       n
   d.
        1n
                                     Project Communications Management    199


Answer Sheet

1.    a   b    c   d   21.   a   b     c    d

2.    a   b    c   d   22.   a   b     c    d

3.    a   b    c   d   23.   a   b     c    d

4.    a   b    c   d   24.   a   b     c    d

5.    a   b    c   d   25.   a   b     c    d

6.    a   b    c   d   26.   a   b     c    d

7.    a   b    c   d   27.   a   b     c    d

8.    a   b    c   d   28.   a   b     c    d

9.    a   b    c   d   29.   a   b     c    d

10.   a   b    c   d   30.   a   b     c    d

11.   a   b    c   d   31.   a   b     c    d

12.   a   b    c   d   32.   a   b     c    d

13.   a   b    c   d   33.   a   b     c    d

14.   a   b    c   d   34.   a   b     c    d

15.   a   b    c   d   35.   a   b     c    d

16.   a   b    c   d   36.   a   b     c    d

17.   a   b    c   d   37.   a   b     c    d

18.   a   b    c   d   38.   a   b     c    d

19.   a   b    c   d   39.   a   b     c    d

20.   a   b    c   d   40.   a   b     c    d
                                              Project Communications Management     201


Answer Key
 1. b. Ensures information being communicated has been appropriately gener-
       ated, received, and understood
       In addition the Manage Communications process focuses on providing
       opportunities for stakeholders to request further information, clarifica-
       tion, and discussion. It enables effective and efficient information to
       flow between stakeholders. [Executing]
       PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 297-298
       PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Executing, 8, Task 6

 2. a. Methods that will be used to convey information
       These methods or technologies can include memos, e-mails, and press
       conferences. They are one of several items to include in this plan. This
       plan, an output of the Plan Communications Management process,
       describes how project communications will be planned, structured,
       monitored, and controlled. [Planning]
       PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 296
       PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Planning, 6, Task 6

 3. b. Using good communications planning
       An effective way to manage cultural diversity on projects is for the
       project manager to get to know the team members and to use good
       communication planning. It is necessary to consider time zones and
       language barriers, as well as cross-cultural differences, and to include a
       glossary of common terminology in the communications management
       plan. [Planning]
       PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 290, 296, 516
       PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Planning, 6, Task 6

 4. b. Stakeholder register
       The stakeholder register is an input to the Plan Communications
       Management process. It contains the identified stakeholders including
       their name, position, location, and role; their main requirements, expec-
       tations, and potential influence; and whether or not they are supporters,
       neutral, or resistors of the project. [Planning]
       PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 291, 398
       PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Planning, 6, Task 6
202      PMP(R) Exam Practice Test and Study Guide


           5. b. Coaching
                   Many communications skills are common to both general management
                   and project management. Coaching is one example. It is especially
                   useful to develop the team to higher levels of competency and perfor-
                   mance and helping people recognize their potential through empow-
                   erment and development. It is used to aid team members to develop
                   or enhance their skills required to achieve project success. It can be a
                   powerful motivator for teams and can lead to greater efficiency and pro-
                   ductivity. [Planning and Executing]
                   PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 288, 519
                   PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Planning, 6, Task 6
                   PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Executing, 8, Task 6

           6. d. Rephrase the content and reflect the feeling
                   Empathic listening requires seeing the world the way the other person
                   sees it, with the goal of understanding that person's views and feelings.
                   Unlike sympathetic listening, empathic listening contains no element
                   of value judgment. It is essential to listen actively and effectively and to
                   question and probe ideas to help ensure better understanding. Active
                   listening and passive listening give the user insight into problem areas,
                   negotiation and conflict resolution strategies, decision making, and
                   problem solving. [Executing]
                   Covey, S.R., The 7 Habits of Highly Effective People: Powerful Lessons in
                   Personal Change, 2013, 229-235
                   PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 288, 515
                   PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Executing, 8, Task 6

           7. a. Formal communication
                   Formal communication provides direction and control for project team
                   members and other employees. They also contain reports, minutes, and
                   briefings and are examples of organizational process assets used in Plan
                   Communications Management, Manage Communications and in Control
                   Communications. [Planning, Executing and Monitoring and Controlling]
                   PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 287, 300, 306
                   PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Planning, 6, Task 6
                   PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Executing, 8, Task 6
                   PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Monitoring and
                   Controlling, 9, Task 1
                                             Project Communications Management    203


8. a. Horizontal
       Communication activities have many potential dimensions to con-
       sider in exchanging information between the sender and the receiver.
       Horizontal communication occurs between or among peers, that is,
       across, rather than up and down, the organization. [Executing]
       PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 287
       PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Executing, 8, Task 6

 9. d. Circulating issues to be discussed
       Meetings are held regularly on projects to update and communicate
       project information and to respond to requests from stakeholders for
       the information. Most meetings consist of stakeholders coming together
       to resolve problems or make decisions. Typical meetings begin with a
       defined list of issues to be discussed, which are distributed in advance
       with minutes and other key information relative to the meeting.
       Such meetings are a tool and technique in the Plan Communications
       Management process. [Planning]
       PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 295
       PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Planning, 6, Task 6

10. b. Performing communications planning early
       On most projects, communications planning should be performed very
       early such as when the project management plan is prepared. This
       approach then allows appropriate resources, such as time and budget,
       to be allocated to communications activities. [Planning]
       PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 290
       PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Planning, 6, Task 6

11. a. Encode the message
       As the first step in the basic communication model, it is essential to
       translate thoughts or ideas into a language that is understood by oth-
       ers. Then, the message is sent using various technologies, and the
       receiver decodes it or translates it back into meaningful thoughts or
       ideas, acknowledges it, and may provide feedback and a response. It is
       a tool and technique in the Plan Communications Management process.
       [Planning]
       PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 293
       PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Planning, 6, Task 6
204      PMP(R) Exam Practice Test and Study Guide


          12. d. Increased conflict
                   Barriers to communication lead to a poor flow of information.
                   Accordingly, messages are misinterpreted by recipients, thereby creat-
                   ing different perceptions, understanding, and frames of reference. Left
                   unchecked, poor communication increases conflict among project
                   stakeholders, which causes the other problems listed to arise. Then, the
                   project manager must work actively to resolve conflicts so disruptive
                   impacts are prevented. [Executing]
                   PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 288, 300
                   Verma, V.K., Managing the Project Team, 1997, 24-25
                   PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Executing, 8, Task 6

          13. a. Each side may misinterpret what the other side has said
                   Effective communication is the key to successful negotiation, which is a
                   key communication skill. Misunderstanding is the most common com-
                   munication problem. A project manager should listen actively, acknowl-
                   edge what is being said, and speak for a purpose. It is essential to listen
                   attentively and communicate articulately. Negotiation is an integral part
                   of project management and if done well increases the probability of
                   project success. [Executing]
                   PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 288, 517
                   Fisher, R., Ury, W., and Patton, B. Getting to Yes: Negotiation Without
                   Giving In, 2nd ed., 1991, 32-34
                   Verma, V.K., Human Resource Skills for the Project Manager, 1996, 165
                   PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Executing, 8, Task 6

          14. b. Passive communications
                   You can use several different methods to share information. Interactive
                   communications are multi-directional in nature, such as conferences
                   and meetings. Pull communications are those methods where the recipi-
                   ents find the information at their leisure and get the information that
                   they want at their discretion. Push communications is targeted informa-
                   tion sent to a select group but does not certify that the recipient actually
                   has received the information, such as e-mail. Passive communications
                   is more of a style of delivering the content or receiving the content.
                   [Planning]
                   PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 295
                   PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Planning, 6, Task 6
                                               Project Communications Management      205


15. a. Stakeholder register
       In the Plan Communications Management process the two documents
       that may be updated are the project schedule and the stakeholder
       register. The stakeholder register is an input to this process but may be
       changed, as the communications management plan is prepared based
       on communications requirements analysis. This analysis determines the
       information needs of the project stakeholders. [Planning]
       PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 291, 297
       PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Planning, 6, Task 6

16. b. Responsibilities
       Among other things, the communications management plan should
       identify the person responsible for communicating the information and
       the person responsible for authorizing release of any confidential infor-
       mation. [Planning]
       PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 296
       PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Planning, 6, Task 6

17. b. Attentive listening
       Negotiation if done well increases the probability of project success and
       involves conferring with others of shared or opposed interests with a
       view toward compromise. Negotiating is required to achieve mutually
       acceptable agreements between parties. A key skill in negotiating is the
       ability to both listen attentively and communicate articulately. [Executing]
       PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 288, 517
       PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Executing, 8, Task 6

18. b. Ensuring optimal information flow among all communication
       participants
       While control communications as a process monitors and controls
       communications throughout the project to ensure the communica-
       tion needs of project stakeholders are met, the key benefit is to ensure
       an optimal information flow among all communication participants at
       any moment in time. This process can trigger the iteration of the Plan
       Communications Management and Manage Communications processes
       based on some key issues and the impact of possible repercussions of
       project communications. [Monitoring and Controlling]
       PMI(R), PMBOK (R) Guide, 2013, 303-304
       PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Monitoring and
       Controlling, 9, Task 1
206      PMP(R) Exam Practice Test and Study Guide


          19. a. Provides what has happened and is a platform for subsequent
                 communications
                   The issue log is an input to Control Communications and is used to
                   document and monitor issue resolution. It can facilitate communica-
                   tions and ensure a common understanding of issues. In this process
                   its information provides a repository of what already has happened in
                   the project and serves as a platform for subsequent communications
                   to be delivered. It documents and helps to monitor who is responsible
                   for resolving certain issues by a target date. It also addresses obstacles
                   that can block the team from achieving its goals. [Monitoring and
                   Controlling]
                   PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 305
                   PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Monitoring and
                   Controlling, 9, Task 5

          20. c. Provide information at an appropriate level for each audience
                   Performance reporting is a tool and technique in Manage
                   Communications. Performance reports range from simple status reports
                   to more elaborate reports. The emphasis is to ensure performance
                   reporting provides the needed information for each audience level. It
                   involves the periodic collection and analysis of performance versus
                   actual data to understand and communicate project progress and to
                   forecast project results. [Executing]
                   PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 301
                   PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Executing, 8, Task 6

          21. a. Percent complete
                   A simple status report may show performance information such as per-
                   cent complete or status information for each area (scope, schedule, cost,
                   and quality). [Executing]
                   PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 301
                   PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Executing, 8, Task 6
                                             Project Communications Management     207


22. b. Project resources should be spent primarily on communicating informa-
       tion that leads to project success
       Communications is considered one of the single most powerful indi-
       cators of project success or failure. Effective communications includes
       an awareness of all types of filters that may be impeding or straining
       communications. Listening is vital to good communications. Resources
       also should be spent on determining where a lack of communications
       can lead to failure. Planning project communications is important to the
       ultimate success of any project as inadequate communications planning
       may lead to problems including message delivery delays, communicat-
       ing information to the wrong people, and insufficient communications
       to stakeholders, which can lead to misunderstandings or misinterpreta-
       tions. [Planning]
       PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 289-291
       PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Planning, 6, Task 6

23. a. Aware of the communication styles of the other parties
       It also is important to consider nuances and norms, relationships, per-
       sonalities, and the situation. These actions lead to mutual understanding
       and thus to effective communications. Other techniques for effective
       communications include sender/receiver models, choice of media, writ-
       ing style, meeting management techniques, presentation techniques,
       facilitation techniques, and listening techniques. [Executing]
       PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 298-299, 515
       PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Executing, 8, Task 6

24. b. Forecasts
       Communications control often entails the need to update project docu-
       ments, including forecasts, performance reports, and the issue log.
       While corporate policies, procedures, and processes are typical orga-
       nizational process assets, in this process, the organizational process
       assets to update are report formats and lessons learned documentation.
       [Monitoring and Controlling]
       PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 308
       PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Monitoring and
       Controlling, 9, Task 1
208      PMP(R) Exam Practice Test and Study Guide


          25. b. Gather thoughts or ideas
                   For any type of communication, the first step in the basic communica-
                   tion model is to encode, which means the sender translates thoughts or
                   ideas into language. It is followed by transmitting the message, decod-
                   ing it by the receiver, acknowledging its receipt from the receiver, and
                   providing feedback and responses and then transmitting them back to
                   the original sender. Communication models are a tool and technique in
                   the Plan Communications Management process. [Planning]
                   PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 293
                   PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Planning, 6, Task 6

          26. b. Escalation processes, including time frames and the management chains
                   Numerous items, including escalation processes, are part of the commu-
                   nications management plan. Business issues may arise that cannot be
                   resolved at a lower staff level. During such a time, an escalation process
                   is required to show time frames and the names of people in the man-
                   agement chain who will work to resolve these issues. [Planning]
                   PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 296
                   PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Planning, 6, Task 6

          27. b. Horizontal
                   Horizontal communication is between the project manager and his or
                   her peers and will be where most of the communications will occur.
                   Accordingly, it is essential for success in a highly competitive envi-
                   ronment and requires diplomacy, experience, and mutual respect.
                   [Executing]
                   Verma, V.K., Managing the Project Team, 1997, 136
                   PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 287
                   PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Executing, 8, Task 6
                                             Project Communications Management     209


28. d. Engaging in communications planning
       The communications management plan is prepared during Plan
       Communications Management. The plan should include a description
       of the information to be distributed such as format, content, level of
       detail, as well as conventions and definitions to be used. It also can
       include templates and guidelines for meetings and e-mails. In preparing
       this plan, and especially in this scenario in the question, meetings are
       a useful tool and technique. They can be used, among other things, to
       determine the most appropriate way to update and communicate proj-
       ect information and to respond to stakeholders. By having client repre-
       sentatives as part of such meetings, the problems in this scenario may
       have been prevented. [Planning]
       PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 296-297
       PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Planning, 6, Task 6

29. c. Knowledge repositories
       Knowledge repositories along with Intranet sites, e-learning, and lessons
       learned data bases are examples of methods of pull communications.
       They are used for large volumes of information or for large audiences
       and require recipients to access communication content at their own
       discretion. They are a communication method, a tool and technique in
       the Plan Communications Management process. [Planning]
       PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 295
       PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Planning, 6, Task 6

30. d. Communications management plan
       The project team must conduct an analysis of stakeholder communica-
       tions requirements to ensure that stakeholders are receiving the infor-
       mation required to participate in the project. For example, stakeholders
       typically require performance reports for information purposes. Such
       information requirements should be included in the communications
       management plan. Conducting a communications requirements analysis
       to determine the stakeholders' information needs is a tool and tech-
       nique in the Plan Communications process. [Planning]
       PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 291, 296
       PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Planning, 6, Task 6
210  PMP(R) Exam Practice Test and Study Guide


         31. c. Control Communications
                 Work performance information, an output of Control Communications,
                 organizes and summaries performance data such as status and prog-
                 ress information on the project at the level required by stakeholders.
                 This information next is communicated to the appropriate stakeholders.
                 [Monitoring and Controlling]
                 PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 307
                 PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Monitoring and
                 Controlling, 9, Task 1

         32. d. Ensuring comprehensiveness, accuracy, and availability
                 Work performance reports are an input to Manage Communications.
                 They are a collection of project performance and status information
                 used to facilitate discussion and create communications. They should be
                 comprehensive, accurate, and available in a timely way. [Executing]
                 PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 299
                 PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Executing, 8, Task 6

         33. c. Manage Communications
                 Feedback from stakeholders is an example of an organizational process
                 asset to update as a result of the Manage Communications process. It
                 used to modify or improve future project performance. Other organi-
                 zational process assets to update are stakeholder notifications, project
                 reports, project presentations, project records, and lessons learned
                 documentation. [Executing]
                 PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 302-303
                 PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Executing, 8, Task 6

         34. c. Setting and managing expectations
                 Communications skills are part of general management skills, and
                 setting and managing expectations are an example in Manage
                 Communications. Setting expectations helps create, collect, distribute,
                 store, retrieve, and ultimately dispose of project information according
                 to the communications management plan. By doing so it enables an
                 efficient and effective communications flow among project stakeholders.
                 [Executing]
                 PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 287-288, 297
                 PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Executing, 8, Task 6
                                               Project Communications Management  211


35. d. Organizational process assets updates
        Any changes in report formats and lessons learned documenta-
        tion are organizational process asset updates as an output of Control
        Communications. The documentation may become part of the historical
        database for both the project and the organization and may include the
        causes of issues, reasons behind the corrective actions taken, and other
        lessons learned in the project. [Monitoring and Controlling]
        PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 308
        PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Monitoring and
        Controlling, 9, Task 6

36. c. Hold meetings
        Meetings are a tool and technique in Control Communications. They
        can be face to face or online and in different locations and may include
        not only the project team but also suppliers, vendors, and other stake-
        holders. It is important to hold these meetings to better determine
        the most appropriate way to update and communicate project perfor-
        mance and to respond to requests from stakeholders for information.
        [Monitoring and Controlling]
        PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 307
        PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Monitoring and
        Controlling, 9, Task 1

37. a. Performance measurement baseline
        Work performance data are an input in Control Communications. These
        data organize and summarize information gathered and present the
        results of comparative analysis to the performance measurement base-
        line. [Monitoring and Controlling]
        PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 305
        PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Monitoring and
        Controlling, 9, Task 1

38. a. The project's organizational structure has a major effect on the project's
       communications requirements.
        Enterprise environmental factors undoubtedly will influence the proj-
        ect's success and must be considered because communication must
        be adapted to the project environment. They are an input to the Plan
        Communications Management Plan process. [Planning]
        PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 29, 291
        PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Planning, 6, Task 6
212      PMP(R) Exam Practice Test and Study Guide


          39. b. 105
                   The formula for determining the number of communication channels
                   is n(n - 1)/2, where n = the number of stakeholders: 15(15 - 1)/2 = (15)
                   (14)/2 = 105. It is important to note that project managers must plan the
                   project's communications requirements carefully, limiting who will com-
                   municate with whom given the potential for confusion when multiple
                   communications channels can exist. Determining these communications
                   channels is part of communications requirements analysis, a tool and
                   technique in the Plan Communications Management process. [Planning]
                   PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 291-292
                   PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Planning, 6, Task 6

                    n(n - 1)
          40. a.
                       2
                   Where n = the number of stakeholders. This formula, as noted in the
                   previous rationale, is important to learn as you may see a test ques-
                   tion on it in the exam. It is necessary to determine the communications
                   channels to help determine the needs of the project's stakeholders and
                   to ensure resources are spent on communicating only the information
                   that contributes to project success or where a lack of communications
                   can lead to failure. [Planning]
                   PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 292
                   PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Planning, 6, Task 6
Project Risk Management


Study Hints
Most exam takers find the Project Risk Management questions on the PMP(R) certi-
fication exam demanding because they address many concepts that project man-
agers may not have been exposed to in their work or education. However, the
questions correspond closely to PMBOK(R) Guide material, so you should not have
much difficulty if you study the concepts and terminology found there. Although
the questions included do not contain mathematically complex work problems,
they do require you to know certain theories, such as expected monetary value
(EMV) and decision-tree analysis. Additionally, you are likely to encounter ques-
tions related to levels of risk faced by both buyer and seller based on various
types of contracts.
    PMI(R) views risk management as a six-step process including Plan Risk
Management, Identify Risks, Perform Qualitative Risk Analysis, Perform
Quantitative Risk Analysis, Plan Risk Responses, and Control Risk. PMBOK(R)
Guide Figure 11-1 provides an overview of this approach. Know this chart
thoroughly.
    Another useful reference is PMI's Practice Standard for Risk Management,
which you can read on the PMI web site.
    Following is a list of the major Project Risk Management topics. Use it to help
focus your study efforts on the areas most likely to appear on the exam.




                                                                                213
                                           Project Risk Management      215


Major Topics
Project risk management

   Risk defined
   Types of risk
   Known risks
   Unknown risks
   Organization's risk attitude
   Risk appetite
   Risk tolerance
   Risk threshold
   Risk factors
   Risk event
   Probability of occurrence
   Amount at stake (impact)
   Risk conditions
   Risk tolerances

Risk processes
Plan Risk Management

   Planning meetings and analyses
   Analytical techniques
   Risk management plan
   Methodology
   Roles and responsibilities
   Budget
   Timing
   Categories
   Definitions of probability and impact
   Probability and impact matrix
   Revised stakeholder tolerances
   Reporting formats
   Tracking

Identify Risks

   Definition
   Timing
   Plans and baselines
   Project documents
216      PMP(R) Exam Practice Test and Study Guide


         Identify Risks tools and techniques

            Documentation reviews
            Brainstorming
            Delphi method
            Interviews
            Root-cause analysis
            Strengths-weaknesses-opportunities-threats (SWOT) analysis
            Influence diagrams
            Checklists
            Assumption analysis
            Diagramming techniques
            Expert judgment

         Risk register

            List of identified risks
            List of potential responses

         Perform Qualitative Risk Analysis

            Prioritize risks for further action
            Risk probability and impact assessment
            Probability and impact matrix
            Risk data quality assessment
            Risk categories
            Risk urgency assessment
            Expert judgment
            Assumption log updates
            Risk register updates
            Relative ranking or priority list of risks
            Risks by category
            Causes of risks requiring particular attention
            Risks requiring near-term responses and additional analysis and responses
            Watch list of low priority risks

         Perform Quantitative Risk Analysis

            Numerical analysis of the effect of identified risks on project objectives
            Interviewing
            Probability distribution
            Sensitivity analysis
            Expected monetary value analysis
            Decision-tree analysis
                                                        Project Risk Management      217


   Monte Carlo analysis
   Path convergence
   Statistical distribution
   Risk register updates
   Probabilistic analysis of the project
   Probability of achieving cost and time objectives
   Prioritized list of quantified risks
   Trends

Plan Risk Responses

   Negative risks or threats
    Avoid
    Transfer
    Mitigate
    Accept
   Positive risks or opportunities
    Exploit
    Share
    Enhance
    Accept
   Contingent responses
   Risk register updates
   Risk-related contract decisions
   Updates to plans and documents

Control Risks

   Definition and purpose
   Tools and techniques
   Risk reassessment
   Risk audits
   Variance and trend analysis
   Technical performance measurement
   Reserve analysis
   Status meetings
   Updates to the risk register
   Change requests
   Updates to organizational process assets, plans, and documents
                                                                    Project Risk Management      219


Practice Questions
   INSTRUCTIONS: Note the most suitable answer for each multiple-choice
   question in the appropriate space on the answer sheet.

 1. As the project manager, you have the option of proposing one of three
    systems to a client: a full-feature system that not only satisfies the minimum
    requirements but also offers numerous special functions (the "Mercedes");
    a system that meets the client's minimum requirements (the "Yugo"); and a
    system that satisfies the minimum requirements plus has a few extra features
    (the "Toyota"). The on-time records and associated profits and losses are
    depicted on the below decision tree. What is the expected monetary value
    of the "Toyota" system?

                                                              Profit/loss


                                                      me   $100,000
                                              On ti 60%
                                                 r o b =
                                               P
                                               Late
                                              Pro
                                                   b=
                                                       40% ($30,000)
                                   s
                                de
                              ce
                           er
                          M

                                                     me       $50,000
                                              On ti 90%
                                     Toyota     r o b =
                                              P
                                               Late
                                              Pro
                                                   b=
                                                        10%   ($10,000)
                                Yu
                                   go




                                                    me  $10,000
                                              On ti 99%
                                                   b =
                                               Pro
                                               Late
                                              Pro
                                                  b=
                                                     1% ($1000)


   a.   $9,900
   b.   $44,000
   c.   $45,000
   d.   $48,000

 2. A risk response strategy that can be used for both threats and
    opportunities is--
   a.   Share
   b.   Avoid
   c.   Accept
   d.   Transfer
220  PMP(R) Exam Practice Test and Study Guide


          3. The risk urgency assessment is a tool and technique used for--
            a.   Plan Risk Responses
            b.   Identify Risks
            c.   Perform Qualitative Risk Analysis
            d.   Perform Quantitative Risk Analysis

          4. Projects are particularly susceptible to risk because--
            a. Murphy's law states that "if something can go wrong, it will"
            b. There is uncertainty in all projects
            c. Project management tools are generally unavailable at the project
               team level
            d. There are never enough resources to do the job

          5. As project manager, you have assembled the team to prepare a comprehen-
             sive list of project risks. Which one of the following documents would be
             the most helpful in this process?
            a.   OBS
            b.   WBS
            c.   RBS
            d.   CBS

          6. You are working on identifying possible risks to your project to develop a
             nutritional supplement. You want to develop a comprehensive list of risks
             that can be addressed later through qualitative and quantitative risk analysis.
             An information gathering technique used to identify risks is--
            a.   Documentation reviews
            b.   Probability and impact analysis
            c.   Checklist analysis
            d.   Brainstorming

          7. The Delphi technique is a particularly useful method for identifying
             risks to--
            a. Present a sequence of decision choices graphically to decision makers
            b. Define the probability of occurrence of specific variables
            c. Reduce bias in the analysis and keep any one person from having undue
               influence on the outcome
            d. Help take into account the attitude of the decision maker toward risk
                                                             Project Risk Management      221


 8. A workaround is--
   a. An unplanned response to a negative risk event
   b. A plan of action to follow when something unexpected occurs
   c. A specific response to certain types of risk as described in the risk man-
      agement plan
   d. A proactive, planned method of responding to risks

 9. Most statistical simulations of budgets, schedules, and resource allocations
    use which one of the following approaches?
   a.   PERT
   b.   Decision-tree analysis
   c.   Present value analysis
   d.   Monte Carlo analysis

10. In the below path convergence example, if the odds of completing activities
    1, 2, and 3 on time are 50 percent, 50 percent, and 50 percent, what are the
    chances of starting activity 4 on day 6?

                                     Activity 1
                                      5 days



                     Start           Activity 2         Activity 4
                                      5 days



                                     Activity 3
                                      5 days



   a.   10 percent
   b.   13 percent
   c.   40 percent
   d.   50 percent

11. A project health check identified a risk that your project would not be com-
    pleted on time. As a result, you are quantifying the project's risk exposure
    and determining what cost and schedule contingency reserves might be
    needed. You performed a schedule risk analysis using Monte Carlo analysis.
    The basis for your schedule risk analysis is the--
   a.   WBS
   b.   Gantt chart
   c.   Schedule network diagram and duration estimates
   d.   Probability/impact risk rating matrix
222    PMP(R) Exam Practice Test and Study Guide


       12. You are developing radio frequency (RF) technology that will improve
           overnight package delivery. You ask each stakeholder to estimate the most
           optimistic package delivery time using the RF technology, the most pessi-
           mistic time, and the most likely time. This shows that for your next step you
           plan to--
           a.   Use a beta or triangular probability distribution
           b.   Conduct a sensitivity analysis
           c.   Structure a decision analysis as a decision tree
           d.   Determine the strategy for risk response

       13. Each one of the following statements about risk avoidance is true EXCEPT
           that it--
           a. Focuses on changing the project management plan to eliminate entirely
              the threat
           b. Isolates the project's objectives from the risk's impact
           c. Accepts the consequences of the risk event should it occur
           d. Changes the project objective that is in jeopardy

        14. If the probability of event 1 is 80 percent and of event 2 is 70 percent and
            they are independent events, how likely is it that both events will occur?
           a.   6 percent
           b.   15 percent
           c.   24 percent
           d.   56 percent

        15. The project scope statement should be used in the Identify Risk process
            because it--
           a. Identifies project assumptions
           b. Identifies all the work that must be done and, therefore, includes all the
              risks on the project
           c. Helps to organize all the work that must be done on the project
           d. Contains information on risks from prior projects

        16. Your project team has identified all the risks on the project and has catego-
            rized them as high, medium, and low. The "low" risks are placed on which
            one of the following for monitoring?
           a.   Threat list
           b.   Low risk list
           c.   Watch list
           d.   Low impact list
                                                           Project Risk Management      223


17. A management reserve is used for--
   a. Risks that are identified at the outset of the project
   b. Risks that are not identified at the outset of the project but are known
      before they occur
   c. Risks that cannot be known before they occur because they are external
      risks
   d. Any risks that cannot be known before they occur

18. The simplest form of quantitative risk analysis and modeling techniques is--
   a.   Probability analysis
   b.   Sensitivity analysis
   c.   Delphi technique
   d.   Utility theory

19. If a business venture has a 60-percent chance to earn $2 million and a
    20-percent chance to lose $1.5 million, what is the expected monetary value
    of the venture?
   a.   -$50,000
   b.   $300,000
   c.   $500,000
   d.   $900,000

20. You are managing the construction of a highly sophisticated data center in
    Port Moresby, Papua, New Guinea. Although this location offers significant
    economic advantages, the threat of typhoons has caused you to create a
    backup plan to operate in Manila in case the center is flooded. This plan is
    an example of what type of risk response?
   a.   Passive avoidance
   b.   Mitigation
   c.   Active acceptance
   d.   Deflection

21. A recent earned value analysis shows that your project is 20 percent com-
    plete, the CPI is 0.67, and the SPI is 0.87. In this situation, you should--
   a. Perform additional resource planning, add resources, and use overtime as
      needed to accomplish the same amount of budgeted work
   b. Re-baseline the schedule, then use Monte Carlo analysis
   c. Conduct a risk response audit to help control risk
   d. Forecast potential deviation of the project at completion from cost and
      schedule targets
224    PMP(R) Exam Practice Test and Study Guide


       22. The purpose of a numeric scale in risk management is to--
           a. Avoid high-impact risks
           b. Assign a relative value to the impact on project objectives if the risk in
              question occurs
           c. Rank order of risks in terms of very low, low, moderate, high, and very
              high
           d. Test project assumptions

       23. Risk score measures the--
           a.   Variability of the estimate
           b.   Product of the probability and impact of the risk
           c.   Range of schedule and cost outcomes
           d.   Reduced monetary value of the risk event

       24. Which of the following is an example of recommended corrective action in
           risk management?
           a.   Conducting a risk audit
           b.   Engaging in additional risk response planning
           c.   Performing the contingency plan
           d.   Conducting a risk review

        25. The primary advantage of using decision-tree analysis in project risk man-
            agement is that it--
           a.   Considers the attitude of the decision maker toward risk
           b.   Forces consideration of the probability of each outcome
           c.   Helps to identify and postulate risk scenarios for the project
           d.   Shows how risks can occur in combination

       26. Your project is using complex, unproven technology. Your team conducted
           a brainstorming session to identify risks. Poor allocation of project resources
           was the number one risk. This risk was placed on the risk register, which
           included at this point a--
           a.   Watch list
           b.   Potential risk response
           c.   Known unknown
           d.   List of other risks requiring additional analysis
                                                           Project Risk Management      225


27. When managing current projects, it is important to use lessons learned from
    previous projects to improve the organization's project management process.
    Therefore, in the Identify Risks process one can review the--
   a.   Process flow charts
   b.   Checklists
   c.   WBS
   d.   Root-cause analysis

28. Risk mitigation involves--
   a.   Using performance and payment bonds
   b.   Eliminating a specific threat by eliminating the cause
   c.   Avoiding the schedule risk inherent in the project
   d.   Reducing the probability and/or impact of an adverse risk event to an
        acceptable threshold

29. On a typical project, when are risks highest and the cost of changes the
    lowest?
   a.   During the concept phase
   b.   At or near completion of the project
   c.   During the implementation phase
   d.   When the project manager is replaced

30. Two key inputs to the Perform Quantitative Risk Analysis process are the--
   a.   WBS and milestone list
   b.   Scope management plan and process improvement plan
   c.   Schedule management plan and cost management plan
   d.   Procurement management plan and quality baseline

31. In preparing the risk management plan meetings, the key purpose of these
    meetings is to--
   a.   Involve those involved in executing the plan
   b.   Enable anyone in the organization to participate
   c.   Define a high-level plan
   d.   Ensure the key stakeholders are invited and participate

32. Which one of the following statements best characterizes an activity cost or
    duration estimate developed with a limited amount of information?
   a.   It   should be part of the planning for the needed management reserve.
   b.   It   is an input to Identify Risks.
   c.   It   is an output from Identify Risks.
   d.   It   must be factored into the list of prioritized project risks.
226      PMP(R) Exam Practice Test and Study Guide


         33. What is the primary difference between a risk audit and a risk reassessment?
             a. A risk reassessment is conducted at the completion of a major phase;
                audits are conducted after the project is complete.
             b. Project stakeholders conduct risk audits; management conducts
                reassessments.
             c. Risk reassessments are regularly scheduled; risk audits are performed as
                defined in the project's risk management plan.
             d. There is no difference; they are virtually the same.

         34. Accurate and unbiased data are essential for Perform Qualitative Risk
             Analysis. Which one of the following should you use to examine the extent
             of understanding of project risk?
             a.   Data quality assessment
             b.   Project assumptions testing
             c.   Sensitivity analysis
             d.   Influence diagrams

          35. Assigning more talented resources to the project to reduce time to comple-
              tion or to provide better quality than originally planned are examples of
              which one of the following strategies?
             a.   Enhance
             b.   Exploit
             c.   Share
             d.   Contingent response

         36. Which of the following is NOT an objective of a risk audit?
             a. Confirming that risk management has been practiced throughout the
                project life cycle
             b. Confirming that the project is well managed and that the risks are being
                controlled
             c. Evaluating the effectiveness of risk responses in dealing with identified
                risks
             d. Ensuring that each risk identified and deemed critical has a computed
                expected value

          37. Contingency planning involves--
             a. Defining the steps to be taken if an identified risk event should occur
             b. Establishing a management reserve to cover unplanned expenditures
             c. Preparing a stand-alone document that is separate from the overall
                project plan
             d. Determining needed adjustments to make during the implementation
                phase of a project
                                                           Project Risk Management      227


38. Assume that you are working on a new product for your firm. Your CEO
    learned that a competitor was about to launch a new product that has simi-
    lar features to those of your project. The competitor plans to launch the
    product on September 1. It is now March 1. Your schedule called for you
    to launch your product on December 1. Your CEO now has now mandated
    that you fast track your project so you can launch your product on August 1.
    This fast track schedule is an example of an--
   a.   Unknown risk
   b.   A risk taken to achieve a reward
   c.   A response that requires sharing the risk
   d.   A passive avoidance strategy

39. As head of the project management office, you need to focus on those items
    where risk responses can lead to better project outcomes. One way to help
    you make these decisions is to--
   a.   Use a probability and impact matrix
   b.   Assess trends in Perform Quantitative Risk Analysis results
   c.   Prioritize risks and conditions
   d.   Assess trends in Perform Qualitative Risk Analysis results

40. You are the project manager for the construction of an incinerator to burn
    refuse. Local residents and environmental groups are opposed to this proj-
    ect. Management agrees to move this project to a different location. This is
    an example of which one of the following risk responses?
   a.   Passive acceptance
   b.   Active acceptance
   c.   Mitigation
   d.   Avoidance
                                             Project Risk Management      229


Answer Sheet

1.    a   b    c   d   21.   a   b   c   d

2.    a   b    c   d   22.   a   b   c   d

3.    a   b    c   d   23.   a   b   c   d

4.    a   b    c   d   24.   a   b   c   d

5.    a   b    c   d   25.   a   b   c   d

6.    a   b    c   d   26.   a   b   c   d

7.    a   b    c   d   27.   a   b   c   d

8.    a   b    c   d   28.   a   b   c   d

9.    a   b    c   d   29.   a   b   c   d

10.   a   b    c   d   30.   a   b   c   d

11.   a   b    c   d   31.   a   b   c   d

12.   a   b    c   d   32.   a   b   c   d

13.   a   b    c   d   33.   a   b   c   d

14.   a   b    c   d   34.   a   b   c   d

15.   a   b    c   d   35.   a   b   c   d

16.   a   b    c   d   36.   a   b   c   d

17.   a   b    c   d   37.   a   b   c   d

18.   a   b    c   d   38.   a   b   c   d

19.   a   b    c   d   39.   a   b   c   d

20.   a   b    c   d   40.   a   b   c   d
                                                           Project Risk Management        231


Answer Key
 1. b. $44,000

                EMVToyota = ($50,000 x 90%) + ( -$10,000 x 10%)
                         = $45,000 + ( -$1,000 )
                         = $44,000

       Expected monetary value analysis (EVM) is a statistical concept that
       calculates the average outcome when the future scenarios may not hap-
       pen, which is considered analysis under uncertainty. The EVM oppor-
       tunities are generally evaluated as positive values, as in this example,
       while threats are expressed as negative values. Review Figure 11-16 in
       the PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013 for another example. [Planning]
       PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 339
       PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Planning, 6, Task 10

 2. c. Accept
       Risk exists on every project, and it is unrealistic to think it can be elimi-
       nated completely. There are certain risks that simply must be accepted
       because we cannot control whether or not they will occur (for example,
       an earthquake). Acceptance is a strategy for dealing with risk that can
       be used for both threats and opportunities. Using it, the project team
       decides to acknowledge the risk and not take any action unless the risk
       occurs if the risk is a threat. If the risk is an opportunity, the project
       team will take advantage of it if it occurs but will not actively pursue it.
       [Planning]
       PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 345-346
       PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Planning, 6, Task 10

 3. c. Perform Qualitative Risk Analysis
       Risks that may happen in the near-term need urgent attention. The pur-
       pose of the risk urgency assessment is to identify those risks that have
       a high likelihood of happening sooner rather than later. Indicators of
       priority may include the probability of detecting the risk, time to affect
       a risk response, symptoms and warning signs, and the risk ranking.
       It often is combined with the risk ranking to give a final risk severity
       ranking. [Planning]
       PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 333
       PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Planning, 6, Task 10
232      PMP(R) Exam Practice Test and Study Guide


           4. b. There is uncertainty in all projects
                   Every project has uncertainty associated with it because a project by its
                   definition is a temporary endeavor undertaken to create a unique prod-
                   uct, service, or result. Risks may be known or unknown. Known risks
                   are those that have been identified and analyzed, so it is possible to plan
                   risk responses. Known risks then can be managed proactively using a
                   contingency reserve. Unknown risks are ones that cannot be managed
                   proactively and may be assigned a management reserve; often, they are
                   considered issues. [Planning and Monitoring and Controlling]
                   PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 3 and 310
                   PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Planning, 6, Task 10
                   PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Monitoring and
                   Controlling, 9, Task 4

           5. c. RBS
                   The risk breakdown structure (RBS) helps to provide a framework for
                   ensuring a comprehensive process of systematically identified risks. It is
                   a hierarchically organized depiction of the identified risks by risk cat-
                   egories. It helps the project team to look at many sources from which a
                   risk may arise in a risk identification exercise. Different RBS structures
                   are appropriate for different types of projects, or the organization can
                   use a previously prepared framework that can be a simple list of cat-
                   egories or it may be structured into a RBS. It is described in the risk
                   categories section of the risk management plan. It also is used as part
                   of risk categorization to determine the areas of the project affected to
                   determine the areas exposed to the effects of uncertainty. It is a tool
                   and technique in Perform Quantitative Risk Analysis. [Planning]
                   PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 317, 332
                   PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Planning, 6, Task 10

           6. d. Brainstorming
                   Brainstorming is a frequently used information-gathering technique for
                   identifying risk, because it enables the project team to develop a list
                   of potential risks relatively quickly. Project team members, or invited
                   experts added possibly under the direction of a facilitator, participate in
                   the session. Traditional brainstorming sessions are free form. Categories
                   of risks, such as in a RBS, can be used as a framework. The identified
                   risks can be categorized by the type of risk, and then their definitions
                   can be refined. [Planning]
                   PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 324
                   PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Planning, 6, Task 10
                                                         Project Risk Management       233


7. c. Reduce bias in the analysis and keep any one person from having
      undue influence on the outcome
      The Delphi technique provides a means for arriving at a consensus
      using a panel of experts to determine a solution to a specific problem.
      Project risk experts are identified but participate anonymously. Each
      panelist answers a questionnaire. Then the responses, along with opin-
      ions and justifications, are summarized and are re-circulated to the
      experts for further comment. Consensus tends to be reached in a few
      rounds in this process. [Planning]
      PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 324
      Wideman, M.R., Project and Program Risk Management: A Guide to
      Managing Project Risks and Opportunities, 1992, C-2 and C-3
      PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Planning, 6, Task 10
8. a. An unplanned response to a negative risk event
      Used in Control Risks, a workaround is a response to a threat that
      has occurred for which a prior response had not been planned or
      was not effective. They also are used to deal with emerging risks that
      were not identified or were passively accepted. It is an example of
      recommended corrective action and is typically handled through a
      change request, processed in the Integrated Change Control process.
      [Monitoring and Controlling]
      PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 353, 567
      PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Monitoring and
      Controlling, 9, Task 4

9. d. Monte Carlo analysis
      A project simulation uses a model that translates the specified detailed
      uncertainties into their potential outcomes on project objectives
      and is an tool and technique in Perform Quantitative Risk Analysis,
      Simulations are typically performed using Monte Carlo in which a
      project model is computed many times with the input values (e.g., cost
      estimates or activity durations) chosen at random for each iteration from
      the probability distribution of these variables. Monte Carlo analysis sup-
      ports various statistical distributions (normal, triangular, beta, uniform,
      etc.) used in estimating budgets, schedules, and resource allocations.
      See Figure 11-17 in the PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013 for an example of the
      results in a cost risk simulation. [Planning]
      Frame, J.D., The New Project Management: Tools for an Age of Rapid
      Change, Corporate Reengineering, and Other Business Realities 2002, 89
      PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 340
      PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Planning, 6, Task 10
234    PMP(R) Exam Practice Test and Study Guide


        10. b. 13 percent


                     Probability (starting activity 4 on day 6) = (0.5)3
                                                               = 0.125 or 13%

                 Such an approach helps to prioritize risks for further quantitative analy-
                 sis and to plan risk responses based on their risk rating. The rating is
                 based on their assessed probability and impact on an objective if it
                 does occur. The probability and impact matrix is a tool and technique
                 in the Perform Qualitative Risk Analysis process. [Planning]
                 PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 331
                 PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Planning, 6, Task 10

        11. c. Schedule network diagram and duration estimates
                 When determining the likelihood of meeting the project's schedule end
                 date through Monte Carlo, the schedule network diagram and duration
                 estimate are used as inputs to the simulation program. Cost risk, on the
                 other hand, uses cost estimates. [Planning]
                 PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 340
                 PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Planning, 6, Task 10

        12. a. Use a beta or triangular probability distribution
                 Interviews often are used to help quantify the probability and conse-
                 quences of risks on project objectives. The type of information collected
                 during the interview depends on the type of probability distribution
                 that is used. As an example, information would be gathered on the
                 optimistic (i.e., low) pessimistic (i.e., high) and most likely scenarios.
                 See Figure 11-13 in the PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, for an example. A beta
                 or triangular distribution is used widely, as shown in Figure 11-14 in the
                 PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013. Other distributions are uniform, normal, and log-
                 normal. Both interviews and probability distributions are examples of
                 data gathering and representation tools and techniques used in Perform
                 Quantitative Risk Analysis. [Planning]
                 PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 336-337
                 PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Planning, 6, Task 10
                                                          Project Risk Management      235


13. c. Accepts the consequences of the risk event should it occur
       Accepting the consequences of the risk event is categorized as risk
       acceptance. With this risk response approach, the project team takes
       no action to reduce the probability of the risk's occurring. Avoidance
       is a strategy where the team acts to eliminate the threat or protect the
       project from its impact. It may require changes to the project manage-
       ment plan to eliminate the threat completely. The project manager may
       isolate the project's objectives from the impact of the risk or change the
       objective in jeopardy. Examples include extending the schedule, chang-
       ing the strategy, and reducing scope. The project may even need to be
       terminated. If these risks occur early in the project, they may be able to
       be avoided by clarifying objectives, obtaining information, improving
       communications, or acquiring expertise. [Planning]
       PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 344-345
       PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Planning, 6, Task 10

14. d. 56 percent
       The likelihood is determined by multiplying the probability of event 1
       by the probability of event 2. While probability investigates the likeli-
       hood that a specific risk will occur, impact investigates the possible
       effect on the project's objectives such as schedule, quality, or perfor-
       mance. Probability and impact are assessed for each risk in Perform
       Qualitative Risk Analysis. Risk probabilities and impact are rated accord-
       ing to objectives in the risk management plan. Refer to Figure 11-10 in
       the PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013 for an example of a probability and impact
       matrix. [Planning]
       PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 331-332
       Wideman, M.R., Project and Program Risk Management: A Guide to
       Managing Project Risks and Opportunities, 1992, IV-7
       PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Planning, 6, Task 10

15. a. Identifies project assumptions
       Project assumptions, which should be enumerated in the project scope
       statement, are areas of uncertainty, and as such are potential causes of
       project risk. Uncertainty of assumptions is evaluated as potential causes
       of project risk. The scope statement, the WBS, and the WBS Dictionary
       are part of the scope baseline, an input to Identify Risks. [Planning]
       PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 322
       PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Planning, 6, Task 10
236    PMP(R) Exam Practice Test and Study Guide


        16. c. Watch list
                 Even low-priority risks must be monitored. A watch list is used to
                 ensure such risks are tracked for continued monitoring in case their
                 status changes. They are still part of the risk register and are included
                 in updates to project documents, an output of the Plan Risk Response
                 process. [Planning]
                 PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 347
                 PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Planning, 6, Task 10

        17. d. Any risks that cannot be known before they occur
                 There is a category of risks that is sometimes called unknown-
                 unknowns, meaning that the risk is not knowable and, therefore, the
                 probability of the risk is also not knowable. For example, your lead
                 technical advisor becoming seriously ill, your offices being ransacked
                 by persons engaged in industrial espionage, or one of your subcontrac-
                 tors wins the lottery and runs off to the Cayman Islands are all exam-
                 ples of risks that are not known before they occur. However, these risks
                 are unknown and cannot be managed proactively and may be assigned
                 a management reserve. [Monitoring and Controlling]
                 PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 310
                 PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Monitoring and
                 Controlling, 9, Task 4

        18. b. Sensitivity analysis
                 Sensitivity analysis, as a quantitative risk analysis and modeling tech-
                 nique, helps to determine the risks that have the most potential impact
                 on the project. It examines the extent to which the variations in the
                 project's objectives correlate with variations in different circumstances.
                 It also can be used to examine the extent to which the uncertainty of
                 each project element affects the objective being studied when all other
                 uncertain elements are held at their baseline values. An example is the
                 tornado diagram; please refer to Figure 11-15 in the PMBOK(R) Guide,
                 2013 for an example. [Planning]
                 PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 338
                 Wideman, M.R., Project and Program Risk Management: A Guide to
                 Managing Project Risks and Opportunities 1992, C-1 and C-2
                 PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Planning, 6, Task 10
                                                           Project Risk Management        237


19. d. $900,000
       EMV = ($2M x 60%) + (-$1.5M x 20%) =
       ($1.2M) + (-$300,000) = $900,000
       As another example of a quantitative risk analysis and modeling tech-
       nique, EMV is a statistical concept that calculates the average outcome
       when the future includes scenarios that may or may not happen. This is
       an example of an opportunity with a positive value. Its use requires a
       risk-neutral assumption, and it is calculated by multiplying the value of
       each possible outcome by the probability of occurrence and adding the
       products together. [Planning]
       Frame, J.D., The New Project Management: Tools for an Age of Rapid
       Change, Corporate Reengineering, and Other Business Realities, 2002, 192
       PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 339
       PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Planning, 6, Task 10

20. c. Active acceptance
       Active acceptance means not only accepting the consequences of a
       risk but also establishing a plan for dealing with the risk, should it
       occur. The most common active acceptance strategy is to establish a
       contingency reserve of time, money, or resources to handle the risks.
       [Planning]
       PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 345
       PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Planning, 6, Task 10

21. d. Forecast potential deviation of the project at completion from cost and
       schedule targets
       Earned value is used for monitoring overall project performance against
       a baseline plan. Outcomes from the analysis may forecast potential
       deviation of the project at completion from its cost and schedule tar-
       gets. Deviations from the baseline plan also may indicate the potential
       impact of threats or opportunities. It is a part of variance analysis, a tool
       and technique in Control Risks. [Monitoring and Controlling]
       PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 352
       PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Monitoring and
       Controlling, 9, Task 4
238    PMP(R) Exam Practice Test and Study Guide


        22. b. Assign a relative value to the impact on project objectives if the risk in
               question occurs
                 You can develop relative or numeric, well-defined scales using agreed-
                 upon definitions by the stakeholders. When using a numeric scale, each
                 level of impact has a specific number assigned to it. Each risk then is
                 rated on its probability and impact on an objective if it does occur.
                 Evaluation of each risk's importance and priority is typically done by
                 using a look-up table or a probability and impact matrix, as shown in
                 Figure 11-10 in the PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013. This matrix specifies condi-
                 tions of probability and impact that lead to ratings of risk as low, mod-
                 erate, or high priority. Descriptive terms or numeric value can be used.
                 [Planning]
                 PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 331-332
                 PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Planning, 6, Task 10

        23. b. Product of the probability and impact of the risk
                 Figure 11-10 in the PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013 shows an example of how an
                 organization can rate a risk for each separate objective. This figure also
                 shows how an organization can develop ways to determine the over-
                 all rating for each risk. Threats and opportunities can be shown in the
                 same matrix. The risk score provides a convenient way to compare risks
                 because comparing impacts or probabilities alone is meaningless. It
                 helps guide risk responses. As shown in Figure 11-10, risks with a nega-
                 tive impact on objectives and are in the high-risk or dark gray area of
                 the matrix may require priority action and an aggressive response strat-
                 egy. Those in the medium gray area or low-risk zone may not require
                 action and may be included in the risk register to be on the watch list
                 or may require some contingency reserve to be added. [Planning]
                 PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 331
                 PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Planning, 6, Task 10

        24. c. Performing the contingency plan
                 Corrective action in Control Risks is the process of making changes
                 to bring expected performance in line with the project management
                 plan. These actions consist of contingency plans or workarounds. To
                 use them a change request sometimes is needed and is submitted
                 to the Perform Integrated Change Control process. [Monitoring and
                 Controlling]
                 PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 353
                 PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Monitoring and
                 Controlling, 9, Task 4
                                                         Project Risk Management      239


25. b. Forces consideration of the probability of each outcome
       As a graphical way to bring together information, decision-tree analysis
       quantifies the likelihood of failure or opportunities and places a value
       on each decision. It is a method of expected monetary value analysis, a
       quantitative risk analysis and modeling technique. [Planning]
       PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 339
       Wideman, M.R., Project and Program Risk Management: A Guide to
       Managing Project Risks and Opportunities, 1992, C-2 and C-3
       PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Planning, 6, Task 10

26. b. Potential risk response
       The risk register is prepared first in the Identify Risks process as an
       output. It is a document in which the results of risk analysis and risk
       response planning are recorded and as they are conducted it contains
       the outcomes of the other risk management processes. The identified
       risks are described is as much detail as is reasonable. They may use risk
       statements in a format such as EVENT may occur causing IMPACT, of
       if a CAUSE exists, EVENT may led to EFFECT. Potential risk responses
       also may be identified during the Identify Risks process, and if this is
       the case they are used as inputs to the Plan Risk Responses process.
       [Planning]
       PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 327
       PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Planning, 6, Task 10

27. b. Checklists
       Checklists are a tool and a technique of the Identify Risks process and
       include risks encountered on similar, previous projects based on histori-
       cal information and knowledge. The lowest level of the RBS can be a
       checklist. However, while it is easy to prepare a checklist and simple
       to use, it is impossible to make sure it covers all items relative to the
       project, and some items on it may not apply to the project. It should be
       reviewed as the project is closed to incorporate any lessons learned for
       future projects. [Planning]
       PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 325
       PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Planning, 6, Task 10
240  PMP(R) Exam Practice Test and Study Guide


         28. d. Reducing the probability and/or impact of an adverse risk event to an
                acceptable threshold
                 It is often more effective to take early action to reduce probability
                 and/or impact of a risk occurring on a project than attempting to
                 repair the damage after the risk has occurred. Examples include adopt-
                 ing less complex processes, conducting more tests, and choosing a
                 more stable supplier. Another example is using a prototype or targeting
                 links that determine severity when it is not possible to reduce the prob-
                 ability of mitigation, such as by designing redundancy in a system to
                 reduce failure from an original component. [Planning]
                 PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 345
                 PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Planning, 6, Task 10

         29. a. During the concept phase
                 Risks are highest at the beginning of a project because the project
                 faces an uncertain future, and the cost of changes is lowest at this time
                 because investments in human and material resources are minimal. Risk
                 and uncertainty decrease during the project as decisions are made and
                 deliverables are accepted. Refer to Figure 2-9 in the PMBOK(R) Guide,
                 2013, as an example. [Planning]
                 Frame, J.D., the New Project Management: Tools for an Age of Rapid
                 Change, Corporate Reengineering, and Other Business Realities, 2002, 80
                 PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 40
                 Wideman, M.R., Project and Program Risk Management: A Guide to
                 Managing Project Risks and Opportunities, 1992, II-1-II-5
                 PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Planning, 6, Task 10

         30. c. Schedule management plan and cost management plan
                 The cost and schedule of a project are two areas significantly affected
                 by risk occurrences. Information on these two areas, because of their
                 quantitative nature, provides excellent input to the Perform Quantitative
                 Risk Analysis process to help determine overall impact and to provide
                 guidelines on establishing and managing risk reserves. [Planning]
                 PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 335
                 PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Planning, 6, Task 10
                                                           Project Risk Management      241


31. c. Define a high-level plan
        Meetings are a tool and technique in the Plan Risk Management pro-
        cess. Typical attendees are the project manager, selected team members,
        anyone in the organization with authority to manage the risk manage-
        ment planning and execution activities (e.g., a member of a PMO with
        expertise in this area or a member of the core team with this exper-
        tise), and others as needed. In these meetings, high-level plans are
        defined for conducting risk management activities. They also include
        cost elements for risk and schedule activities, risk contingency reserve
        approaches, risk management responsibilities, and templates if available
        for risk categories and terms. The outputs of these meetings are sum-
        marized in the risk management plan. [Planning]
        PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 316
        PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Planning, 6, Task 10

32. b. It is an input to Identify Risks.
        Much of the output from planning in other knowledge areas, such as
        activity cost and duration estimates, may entail risk and is reviewed
        during the Identify Risks process. This process requires an understand-
        ing of the schedule, cost, and quality management plans found in the
        project management plan. Estimates that are aggressive or developed
        with a limited amount of information are even more likely to entail risk
        and, therefore, must also be an input to the Identify Risks process. By
        reviewing activity cost estimates, risks can be identified as they provide
        a quantitative assessment of the likely cost to complete schedule activi-
        ties, and often are expressed as a range of results showing the degree
        of risk. This review may result in predictions that indicate whether the
        estimate is sufficient or insufficient to complete the project; an insuf-
        ficient estimate could pose a risk to the project. By reviewing activity
        duration estimates, risks may be identified to the time allowance for the
        activities in the project as a whole. The range of estimates may indicate
        relevant degrees of risk. [Planning]
        PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 322
        PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Planning, 6, Task 10
242    PMP(R) Exam Practice Test and Study Guide


        33. c. Risk reassessments are regularly scheduled; risk audits are performed as
               defined in the project's risk management plan.
                 Both are tools and techniques in the Control Risks process. Risk reas-
                 sessment is an ongoing activity by the project team. Risks should be
                 discussed at every status meeting. They are regularly scheduled, and
                 the amount and detail of repetition depends on how well the project is
                 progressing relative to its objectives. Risk audits are performed during
                 the project life cycle to examine and document the effectiveness of risk
                 responses. They are conducted at appropriate frequencies as defined in
                 the risk management plan. They may be included during routine proj-
                 ect review meetings or at separate risk audit meetings. [Monitoring and
                 Controlling]
                 PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 351
                 PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Monitoring and
                 Controlling, 9, Task 4

        34. a. Data quality assessment
                 Perform Qualitative Risk Analysis requires accurate and unbiased data.
                 The use of low-quality data may result in a qualitative risk analysis that
                 is of little use to the project manager regarding understanding of the
                 risk, data available about the risk, data quality, and data reliability and
                 integrity. Often, the collection of risk information is difficult and con-
                 sumes more time and resources than planned. Refer to Figure 11-10 in
                 the PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013 for an example to see the values used. In the
                 figure, the numbers in the scale are established when the risk attitude
                 of the organization is defined. [Planning]
                 PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 331-332
                 PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Planning, 6, Task 10

        35. b. Exploit
                 Although it might have a negative connotation, exploitation is a strategy
                 used for risks with positive impacts where the organization wants to
                 ensure that the opportunity is realized. This strategy seeks to eliminate
                 uncertainty with a particular upside risk by ensuring the opportunity
                 happens. Other examples, in addition to that in the question, are using
                 new technology or upgrading technology to reduce the cost and dura-
                 tion required to realize the project's objectives. [Planning]
                 PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 345
                 PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Planning, 6, Task 10
                                                           Project Risk Management       243


36. d. Ensuring that each risk identified and deemed critical has a computed
       expected value
       It is not feasible or necessary to quantify every risk. Therefore, a risk
       audit should never have as an objective to ensure that each project risk
       has a computed expected value. However, the format for the audit and
       its objectives should be defined clearly before the audit is conducted.
       [Monitoring and Controlling]
       PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 351
       PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Monitoring and
       Controlling, 9, Task 4

37. a. Defining the steps to be taken if an identified risk event should occur
       Contingent response strategies are a tool and technique in Plan Risk
       Responses. For some risks it is appropriate for the project team to make
       a response plan that will be executed only under certain predefined
       conditions if it is believed that there will be sufficient warning to imple-
       ment the plan. Events that trigger the contingency response should be
       defined and tracked. Risk responses identified through this technique
       may be called contingency plans or fallback plans and include identi-
       fied triggering events that set the plans into effect. [Planning]
       PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 346
       PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Planning, 6, Task 10

38. b. A risk taken to achieve a reward
       Project risk has its origin in the uncertainty that is present in all proj-
       ects. Organizations and stakeholders are willing to accept varying
       degrees of risk, and risks that are threats to the project may be accepted
       if the risks are within tolerances and are in balance with the rewards
       to be gained. This example of adopting a fast-track schedule is a risk
       taken to achieve the reward created by the earlier completion date.
       [Planning]
       PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 345
       PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Planning, 6, Task 10
244    PMP(R) Exam Practice Test and Study Guide


        39. a. Use a probability and impact matrix
                 The probability and impact matrix can be used to classify risks accord-
                 ing to their level of impact and to prioritize them for future quantitative
                 analyses and responses based on their rating. Typically these risk rating
                 rules are specified by the organization in advance of the project. The
                 matrix specifies combinations of probability and impact that lead to rat-
                 ing the risks as low, moderate, or high priority. See Figure 11-10 for an
                 example in the PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013. [Planning]
                 PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 331-332
                 PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Planning, 6, Task 10

        40. d. Avoidance
                 Risk avoidance usually involves changing the project management plan
                 to eliminate the threat entirely. The project manager may isolate the
                 project's objectives from the risk's impact or change the objective in
                 jeopardy. [Planning]
                 PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 344
                 PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Planning, 6, Task 10
Project Procurement
Management


Study Hints
The Project Procurement Management questions on the PMP(R) certification exam
tend to be more process oriented than legally focused. You do not need to know
any country's specific legal code; however, some non-U.S. exam takers complain
that the nature of many of the questions requires an understanding of U.S. con-
tract law. Although an occasional question relating to the U.S. system may appear
on the exam, such questions do not seem to be problematic for most exam tak-
ers. A firm understanding of the procurement process usually will help you to
find the correct answer. Moreover, the questions will be worded such that the
project manager or project team is the "buyer."
   The exam requires you to know the basic differences between the three
broad categories of contracts (fixed-price, cost-reimbursement, and time-and-
materials) and the risks inherent in specific contract types for both the buyer and
the seller. Several questions will also test your knowledge of the various types of
contracts within each category (for example, firm-fixed-price versus fixed-price-
incentive-fee contracts). A question or two may also be included on international
contracting, such as the timing of foreign currency exchange and duty on goods
delivered to a foreign country.
   PMI(R) views Project Procurement Management as a four-step process com-
prising Plan Procurement Management, Conduct Procurements, Control
Procurements, and Close Procurements. See PMBOK(R) Guide Figure 12-1 for an
overview of this structure. Know this chart thoroughly.
   Following is a list of the major Project Procurement Management topics. Use it
to help focus your study efforts on the areas most likely to appear on the exam.




                                                                                245
                                              Project Procurement Management    247


Major Topics
Project procurement management overview
Plan Procurement Management

   Make-or-buy analysis
   Procurement management plan
   Procurement statement of work
   Contract categories and risks
    Fixed-price
    Cost-reimbursement
    Time-and-materials
    Contract types and risks
    Cost-plus-fixed-fee
    Cost-plus-incentive-fee
    Cost-plus-award-fee
    Fixed-price-incentive-fee
    Fixed price with economic price adjustments
   Contract incentives
   Contract origination
   Source selection criteria
   Procurement documents
   Make-or-buy decisions
   Change requests

Conduct Procurements

   Proposals
   Qualified seller list
   Evaluating prospective sellers
    Contract negotiation
    Weighting system
    Screening system
    Independent estimates
    Proposal evaluation techniques
   Bidder conferences
   Expert judgment
   Analytical techniques
   Contract negotiation stages and tactics
    Five stages
    Negotiation tactics
    Selected sellers
    Agreements
   Contracts
248  PMP(R) Exam Practice Test and Study Guide


        Control Procurements

           Procurement documents
           Standard clauses
           Elements of a legally enforceable contract
           Changes and change control
           Undefined work
           Procurement performance reviews
           Claims administration
           Records management system

        Close Procurements

           Contract closure procedure
           Procurement audit
           Procurement negotiations
           Closed procurements
                                                   Project Procurement Management    249


Practice Questions
   INSTRUCTIONS: Note the most suitable answer for each multiple-choice
   question in the appropriate space on the answer sheet.

 1. Assume you are working on a complex project. In fact, it is the most com-
    plex project in your organization, so the CEO is interested in it and asks
    questions about its progress in staff meetings. On this project, you are out-
    sourcing a lot of this work. This means you should--
   a.   Award firm-fixed projects
   b.   Hold weekly meetings with each contractor to assess progress personally
   c.   Manage these multiple contracts in sequence
   d.   Have a full-time contract specialist and set up a projectized structure

 2. Which term describes those costs in a contract that are associated with two
    or more projects but are not traceable to either of them individually?
   a.   Variable
   b.   Direct
   c.   Indirect
   d.   Semivariable

 3. Contract type selection is dependent on the degree of risk or uncertainty
    facing the project manager. From the perspective of the buyer, the preferred
    contract type in a low-risk situation is--
   a.   Firm-fixed-price
   b.   Fixed-price-incentive
   c.   Cost-plus-fixed fee
   d.   Cost-plus-a-percentage-of-cost

 4. The buyer has negotiated a cost-plus-incentive fee contract with the seller.
    The contract has a target cost of $300,000, a target fee of $40,000, a share
    ratio of 80/20, a maximum fee of $60,000, and a minimum fee of $10,000.
    If the seller has actual costs of $380,000, how much fee will the buyer pay?
   a.   $104,000
   b.   $56,000
   c.   $30,000
   d.   $24,000
250      PMP(R) Exam Practice Test and Study Guide


           5. Assume you are managing a project and have decided to outsource about
              40% of the work. You expect to award three contracts for certain work
              packages in the WBS. The benefit of this Conduct Procurements process is
              that it--
             a. Determines the type of contract to award
             b. Aligns internal and external stakeholder expectations through established
                agreements
             c. Enables a detailed review of the make-or-buy decisions
             d. Avoids the need for additional change requests

           6. In some cases, contract termination refers to--
             a.   Contract closeout by mutual agreement
             b.   Contract closeout by delivery of goods or services
             c.   Contract closeout by successful performance
             d.   Certification of receipt of final payment

           7. Significant differences between the seller's price and your independent esti-
              mate may indicate all the following EXCEPT the--
             a.   SOW was not adequate
             b.   Seller misunderstood the SOW
             c.   Sellers failed to respond
             d.   Project team chose the wrong contract type

           8. You are a contractor for a state agency. Your company recently completed
              a water resource management project for the state and received payment
              on its final invoice today. A procurement audit has been conducted. Formal
              notification that the contract has been closed should be provided to your
              company by the--
             a.   State's project manager
             b.   Person responsible for procurement administration
             c.   Project control officer
             d.   Project sponsor or owner

           9. Which term describes contract costs that are traceable to or caused by a spe-
              cific project work effort?
             a.   Variable
             b.   Fixed
             c.   Indirect
             d.   Direct
                                                   Project Procurement Management    251


10. You are awarding a contract to help develop a new feature in the eighth
    generation phone. You feel this feature will enable your company to outpace
    the competition. However, you know some potential sellers have worked for
    competitors in the past. As you select source selection criteria, you should
    include--
   a.   Compensatory damages
   b.   Overall life-cycle costs
   c.   Intellectual property rights
   d.   Warranty

11. Which term is NOT a common name for a procurement document that solic-
    its an offer from prospective sellers?
   a.   Seller initial response
   b.   Request for information
   c.   Request for quotation
   d.   Invitation for negotiation

12. It is important to use a records management system on any project. In the
    procurement management process example of items to archive are--
   a.   Contract completion statement
   b.   Correspondence
   c.   Outstanding claims
   d.   Settled subcontracts

13. Recent data indicate that more than 10,000 airline passengers are injured
    each year from baggage that falls from overhead bins. You performed a
    make-or-buy analysis and decided to outsource an improved bin design and
    manufacture it. The project team needs to develop a list of qualified sources.
    As a general rule, which method would the project team find especially
    helpful?
   a.   Advertising
   b.   Internet
   c.   Trade catalogs
   d.   Relevant local associations

14. As you prepare to close out contracts on your project, you should review all
    the following types of documentation EXCEPT the--
   a.   Contract document for the contract being closed
   b.   Procurement audit report
   c.   Payment records
   d.   Contract changes
252  PMP(R) Exam Practice Test and Study Guide


         15. You are working on a new project in your organization. You need to decide
             how best to staff the project and handle all its resource requirements. Your
             first step should be to--
            a. Conduct a make-or-buy analysis
            b. Conduct a market survey
            c. Solicit proposals from sellers using an RFP to determine whether you
               should outsource the project
            d. Review your procurement department's qualified-seller lists and send an
               RFP to selected sellers

         16. Your company decided to award a contract for p roject management services
             on a pharmaceutical research project. Because your company is new to
             project management and does not understand the full scope of services that
             may be needed under the contract, it is most appropriate to award a--
            a.   Firm-fixed-price contract
            b.   Fixed-price-incentive contract
            c.   Cost-plus-a-percentage-of-cost contract
            d.   Time-and-materials contract

         17. Requirements for formal contract acceptance and closure usually are defined
             in the--
            a.   Proposal
            b.   Statement of work
            c.   Contract terms and conditions
            d.   Procurement audit report

         18. You plan to award a contract to provide project management training for
             your company. You decide it is important that any prospective contractor
             have an association with a major university that awards master's certificates
             in project management. This is an example of--
            a.   Setting up an independent evaluation
            b.   Preparing requirements for your statement of work
            c.   Establishing a weighting system
            d.   Establishing source selection criteria

         19. The project team has the responsibility to ensure a procurement
             agreement--
            a.   Incorporates other items the seller specifies
            b.   Focuses on all selected sellers deemed to be in the competitive range
            c.   Adheres to the negotiation process
            d.   Adheres to the organization's procurement policies
                                                    Project Procurement Management    253


20. During the course of working with a seller that no one had worked with
    previously and is working on site with your team, inspections and audits can
    be conducted as you specified in the contract. You decided to hire an out-
    side person, considered to be an expert in project management to conduct
    an audit. In doing so, it is important to note that--
   a. The audit can include buyer management personnel
   b. The audit should be completed quickly so you can process change
      requests as needed for recommendations
   c. The auditor focuses on completed work rather than work in progress
   d. The auditor practices a policy of `no surprises' with you and your team
      with transparent communications

21. You are responsible for ensuring that your seller's performance meets con-
    tractual requirements. For effective contract control, you should--
   a.   Hold a bidders' conference
   b.   Establish the appropriate contract type
   c.   Implement the contract change control system
   d.   Develop a statement of work

22. The primary benefit of contract control procurements is to ensure that--
   a.   Buyers conduct performance reviews
   b.   Payment is made in a timely fashion
   c.   Disagreements are handled quickly and to everyone's satisfaction
   d.   Both parties meet contractual obligations and protect their legal rights

23. An often-overlooked output to the Conduct Procurements process is--
   a.   Analytical techniques
   b.   Resource calendars
   c.   Work performance information
   d.   Work performance data

24. Assume you have completed your procurement management plan and your
    make-or-buy analysis and now are updating project documents as a result of
    this work. You need to update the--
   a.   Stakeholder register
   b.   Requirements traceability matrix
   c.   Negotiations process
   d.   Management systems for contractual relationships
254      PMP(R) Exam Practice Test and Study Guide


         25. You have decided to award a contract to a seller that has provided qual-
             ity services to your company frequently in the past. Your current project,
             although somewhat different from previous projects, is similar to other work
             the seller has performed. In this situation, to minimize your risk you should
             award what type of contract?
             a.   Fixed price with economic price adjustment
             b.   Fixed-price-incentive (firm target)
             c.   Firm-fixed-price
             d.   Cost-plus-award-fee

         26. As project manager, you need a relatively fast and informal method address-
             ing disagreements with contractors. One such method is to submit the
             issue in question to an impartial third party for resolution. This process is
             known as--
             a.   Alternative dispute resolution
             b.   Problem processing
             c.   Steering resolution
             d.   Mediation litigation

          27. Work performance data often are used In Control Procurements to show--
             a.   Whether quality standards are being satisfied
             b.   If approved change requests are being implemented
             c.   Current or potential problems
             d.   Compliance with contracts

         28. In the Plan Procurement Management process, potential sellers are evaluated,
             especially if the buyer wants to exercise some degree of influence or control
             over acquisition decisions. This means thought also should be given to--
             a.   Cost estimates developed by potential sellers
             b.   The scope baseline
             c.   How well sellers implement corrective actions as needed
             d.   Responsibility to acquire professional licenses

          29. A buyer has negotiated a fixed-price-incentive-fee contract with the seller.
              The contract has a target cost of $200,000, a target profit of $30,000, and
              a target price of $230,000. The buyer also has negotiated a ceiling price of
              $270,000 and a share ratio of 70/30. If the seller completes the contract with
              actual costs of $170,000, how much profit will the buyer pay the seller?
             a.   $21,000
             b.   $35,000
             c.   $39,000
             d.   $51,000
                                                       Project Procurement Management    255


30. Requirements for acceptance criteria are defined in the--
   a.   Contract
   b.   Procurement management plan
   c.   Overall project management plan
   d.   Specifications

31. Payment systems are a tool and technique in Control Procurements. They
    are typically processed by--
   a.   The   contracting officer's technical representative
   b.   The   contracts office
   c.   The   accounts payable system
   d.   The   contractual terms and conditions

32. Assume before you award a contract, you and your team are striving to iden-
    tify areas that may have more risk. You decide to concentrate on--
   a.   Use of an independent estimator
   b.   Past performance
   c.   Quality levels
   d.   Prior agreements

33. Assume in your project, you need to use a contractor. But you and the seller
    have a prior agreement in place. This means together you can prepare a
    procurement statement of work. It is an example of--
   a.   Core capabilities of the organization
   b.   Organizational process assets
   c.   Mutual development of contract clauses
   d.   Value delivered by vendors

34. The best approach to resolve the settlement of all outstanding contract
    changes, claims, and disputes is using--
   a.   Litigation
   b.   Alternative dispute resolution
   c.   Negotiation
   d.   Mediation

35. Assume on your project, you have a requested but unresolved change as
    you provided direction to the seller to take action. You consider this change
    to be one that is--
   a.   A claim
   b.   A constructive change to the contract
   c.   One that requires the need to negotiate a settlement
   d.   An undefinitized contractual action
256    PMP(R) Exam Practice Test and Study Guide


       36. You are working on a complex project designed to combat glaucoma with-
           out the need to take eye drops. You are going to outsource part of the work
           to experts in the glaucoma field and have identified four sellers that have
           been judged to be in a competitive rage. These sellers and you have--
           a.   Negotiated a draft contract
           b.   Scheduled presentations to your executive team
           c.   Established partnering agreements to reduce the possibility of claims
           d.   Determined the best approach is a firm-fixed-price contract

        37. Assume you thought you would need to outsource part of your work on
            your telecom project. You conducted a make-or-buy analysis, and the deci-
            sion was made not to outsource. This means--
           a.   You have no additional work remaining in procurement management
           b.   The decision should be documented in a decision log
           c.   You should update organizational process assets
           d.   Your procurement management plan may define processes to follow
                internal to the organization

       38. You are the project manager with a team to design the next generation of
           automobiles for your company. After an extensive make-or-buy analysis, you
           have determined which items will be outsourced. Now you are working on
           the statements of work for each item to be procured. It is important as you
           do so to--
           a.   Determine constraints and assumptions
           b.   Follow the scope baseline
           c.   Identify any prequalified sellers
           d.   Recognize long-lead items

        39. Which of the following types of contracts has the least risk to the seller?
           a.   Firm-fixed-price
           b.   Cost-plus-fixed-fee
           c.   Cost-plus-award-fee
           d.   Fixed-price-incentive fee

       40. Assume that your company has a cost-plus-fixed-fee contract. The con-
           tract value is $110,000, which consists of $100,000 of estimated costs with
           a 10-percent fixed fee. Assume that your company completes the work but
           only incurs $80,000 in actual cost. What is the total cost to the project?
           a.   $80,000
           b.   $90,000
           c.   $100,000
           d.   $125,000
                                     Project Procurement Management    257


Answer Sheet

1.    a   b    c   d   21.   a   b   c   d

2.    a   b    c   d   22.   a   b   c   d

3.    a   b    c   d   23.   a   b   c   d

4.    a   b    c   d   24.   a   b   c   d

5.    a   b    c   d   25.   a   b   c   d

6.    a   b    c   d   26.   a   b   c   d

7.    a   b    c   d   27.   a   b   c   d

8.    a   b    c   d   28.   a   b   c   d

9.    a   b    c   d   29.   a   b   c   d

10.   a   b    c   d   30.   a   b   c   d

11.   a   b    c   d   31.   a   b   c   d

12.   a   b    c   d   32.   a   b   c   d

13.   a   b    c   d   33.   a   b   c   d

14.   a   b    c   d   34.   a   b   c   d

15.   a   b    c   d   35.   a   b   c   d

16.   a   b    c   d   36.   a   b   c   d

17.   a   b    c   d   37.   a   b   c   d

18.   a   b    c   d   38.   a   b   c   d

19.   a   b    c   d   39.   a   b   c   d

20.   a   b    c   d   40.   a   b   c   d
                                                  Project Procurement Management      259


Answer Key

 1. c. Manage these multiple contracts in sequence
       Complex projects often involve contractors and subcontractors. While
       they may be managed in sequence, they also maybe managed simul-
       taneously. In such cases, each contract life cycle many end during any
       phase of the project life cycle. Contracts also can be awarded in any
       phase except in the Close Project phase. [Monitoring and Controlling]
       PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 357
       PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Monitoring and
       Controlling, 9, Task 7

 2. c. Indirect
       The nature of an indirect cost is such that it is neither possible nor prac-
       tical to measure how much of the cost is attributable to a single project.
       These costs are allocated to the project by the performing organiza-
       tion as a cost of doing business. In Plan Procurement Management,
       these costs are considered in the make-or-buy analysis such as the
       direct costs of supporting the purchasing process and the purchased
       item. Make-or-buy analysis is a tool and technique in Plan Procurement
       Management. [Planning]
       PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 202, 365
       PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Planning, 6, Task 7

 3. a. Firm-fixed-price
       Buyers prefer the firm-fixed-price contract because it places more
       risk on the seller. Although the seller bears the greatest degree of
       risk, it also has the maximum potential for profit. Because the seller
       receives an agreed-upon amount regardless of its costs, it is motivated
       to decrease costs by efficient production. It is the most commonly
       used contract as the price for goods is set at the beginning and is not
       changed unless the scope of work changes. Types of contracts are an
       input to the Plan Procurement Management process. [Planning]
       Adams, J.R., et al., Principles of Project Management, 1997, 229-231
       PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 363
       PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Planning, 6, Task 7
260    PMP(R) Exam Practice Test and Study Guide


           4. d. $24,000
                  Comparing actual costs with the target cost shows an $80,000 over-
                  run. The overrun is shared 80/20 (with the buyer's share always listed
                  first). In this case 20% of $80,000 is $16,000, the seller's share, which is
                  deducted from the $40,000 target fee. The remaining $24,000 is the fee
                  paid to the seller. In this type of contract the seller is reimbursed for all
                  allowable costs for performing the contract work and receives a prede-
                  termined incentive fee based on achieving certain performance objec-
                  tives set forth in the contract. If the final costs are less than or greater
                  than the original estimated costs, then the buyer and seller share costs
                  based on a predetermined cost sharing formula, such as the 80/20 as
                  discussed. [Planning and Closing]
                  PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 364
                  PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Planning, 6, Task 7
                  PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Closing, 11, Task 3

           5. b. Aligns internal and external stakeholder expectations through estab-
                 lished agreements
                  The Conduct Procurements process obtains seller responses, selects sell-
                  ers, and awards contracts. During the process, the team receives bids or
                  proposals and will apply previously defined selection criteria to select
                  the sellers qualified to perform the work. [Executing]
                  PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 371-372
                  PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Executing, 8, Task 2

           6. a. Contract closeout by mutual agreement
                  A contract can end in successful performance, mutual agreement, or
                  breach of contract. Early termination is a special case of procurement
                  closure that can result from a mutual agreement by both parties, from
                  the default of one party, or for the convenience of the buyer. The rights
                  and responsibilities of both parties for early termination are stated in
                  the terminations clause of the contract. [Closing]
                  PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 387
                  PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Closing, 11, Task 3
                                                   Project Procurement Management    261


 7. d. Project team chose the wrong contract type
        The contract type is typically dictated by the procurement SOW and
        chosen by the contracting officer. Independent estimates are a tool and
        technique in Conduct Procurements. The procuring organization may
        choose to prepare its own independent estimate or have an estimate
        prepared by an outsider who is an expert in this area to serve as a
        benchmark on proposed responses. [Executing]
        PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 376
        PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Executing, 8, Task 2

 8. b. Person responsible for procurement administration
        The person responsible for procurement administration should provide,
        in writing, formal notification that the contract has been completed.
        Requirements for formal acceptance and closeout should be defined in
        the terms and conditions in the contract and are included in the pro-
        curement management plan. [Closing]
        PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 389
        PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Closing, 11, Task 3

 9. d. Direct
        Direct costs are always identified with the cost objectives of a specific
        project and include salaries, travel and living expenses, and supplies in
        direct support of the project. These costs are considered as part of the
        make-or-buy analysis, a tool and technique used in Plan Procurement
        Management. [Planning]
        PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 202, 207, and 365
        PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Planning, 6, Task 7

10. c. Intellectual property rights
        Intellectual property rights should be considered as they refer to
        whether the seller asserts intellectual property rights in the work pro-
        cesses or services they will use or in the products they will produce
        for the product. You want to make sure the seller cannot then work on
        something similar for a competitor. Source selection criteria are an out-
        put from the Plan Procurement Management process. [Planning]
        PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 369
        PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Planning, 6, Task 7
262    PMP(R) Exam Practice Test and Study Guide


        11. b. Request for information
                 Procurement documents are used to solicit proposals from prospective
                 sellers. Terms such as bid, tender, and quotation are generally used if
                 the decision will be based on price, while a term such as proposal is
                 used when there are other considerations. Common terms for different
                 types of documents, in addition to those in this question, are request
                 for proposal and tender notice. Procurement documents are an output
                 of the Plan Procurement Management process. A request for informa-
                 tion generally is used by the buyer to have potential sellers propose
                 various pieces of information related to a product, service, or result or
                 to a seller capability. [Planning]
                 PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 368
                 PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Planning, 6, Task 7

        12. b. Correspondence
                 The records management system is a tool and technique in Close
                 Procurements. Contract documents and correspondence are archived in
                 it as part of this process. [Closing]
                 PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 389
                 PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Closing, 11, Task 3

        13. a. Advertising
                 Advertising is a tool and technique in Conduct Procurements. It enables
                 existing lists of sellers to be expanded by using advertising in gen-
                 eral circulation such as in newspapers or specialty trade publications.
                 Online resources also can be used. Some government agencies require
                 public advertising for certain types of procurement items, and most
                 require public advertising or online posting of pending government
                 contracts. [Executing]
                 PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 376
                 PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Executing, 8, Task 2
                                                  Project Procurement Management    263


14. b. Procurement audit report
       In most organizations, a procurement audit is conducted after the con-
       tract has been closed. It is a tool and technique in Close Procurements
       and is a structured review of the procurement process from the Plan
       Procurement Management through Close Procurements process. Its
       objective is to identify successes and failures that warrant recognition
       in the preparation or administration of other procurement contracts on
       the project or in the organization. The other items in the question are
       examples of procurement documents to review, an input to the Close
       Procurements process. [Closing]
       PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 388
       PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Closing, 11, Task 3

15. a. Conduct a make-or-buy analysis
       A make-or-buy analysis is a Plan Procurement Management tool and
       technique used to determine whether a particular product, service, or
       result can be produced or performed cost effectively by the performing
       organization or should be contracted out to another organization. The
       analysis includes both direct and indirect costs. Available contract types
       also are considered as part of the buy analysis. [Planning]
       PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 365
       PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Planning, 6, Task 7

16. d. Time-and-materials contract
       A time-and-materials contract is a type of contract that provides for the
       acquisition of supplies or services on the basis of direct labor hours, at
       specified fixed hourly rates for wages, overhead, general and adminis-
       trative expenses, and profit; and materials at cost, including materials-
       handling costs. They are a hybrid type of contract in that they contain
       aspects of cost-reimbursable and fixed-price contracts. They are often
       used to augment existing staff, acquire experts, and obtain outside sup-
       port when a precise statement of work cannot be quickly prepared.
       They fit the scenario in this question and can increase in contract value
       if required. They are part of organizational process assets, an input to
       Plan Procurement Management. [Planning]
       PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 364
       PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Planning, 6, Task 7
264      PMP(R) Exam Practice Test and Study Guide


          17. c. Contract terms and conditions
                   The contract terms and conditions typically describe the procedure the
                   buyer will employ to close the contract. The Close Procurement process
                   therefore supports the Close Project or Phase process as it ensures all
                   contractual agreements are completed or terminated. [Closing]
                   PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 387
                   PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Closing, 11, Task 3

          18. d. Establishing source selection criteria
                   The selection criteria are typically included in procurement documents
                   and are then used to rate or score proposals. They can be objective or
                   subjective. In this specific question, they are more than just price as
                   they are also including areas such as understanding of need, techni-
                   cal capability, management approach, technical approach, production
                   capacity and interest, and past performance. Source selection criteria are
                   an input to Plan Procurement Management. [Planning]
                   PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 368-369
                   PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Planning, 6, Task 7

          19. d. Adheres to the organization's procurement policies
                   Agreements are an output of the Conduct Procurements process and
                   include terms and conditions plus other items the buyer specifies as to
                   what the seller is to perform or provide. However, it is the responsibil-
                   ity of the project management team to make certain the agreements
                   meet the needs of the project and adhere to organizational procurement
                   policies. [Executing]
                   PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 377
                   PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Executing, 8, Task 2

          20. a. The audit can include buyer management personnel
                   Inspections and audits are tools and techniques in the Control
                   Procurements process. They are required by the buyer and supported
                   by the seller as specified in the procurement contract. As the project is
                   executed, they can verify compliance in the seller's work processes and
                   deliverables. Further, if specified in the contract, some audit teams can
                   include buyer personnel, which is appropriate in this question's sce-
                   nario because the seller's staff is working on site with the project team.
                   [Monitoring and Controlling]
                   PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 383
                   PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Monitoring and
                   Controlling, 9, Task 7
                                                    Project Procurement Management     265


21. c. Implement the contract change control system
        The contract change control system is a tool and technique in Control
        Procurements. It defines the process to modify the procurement. It
        includes paperwork, tracking systems, dispute resolution procedures, and
        approval levels necessary to authorize changes and is integrated with the
        project's integrated change control system. [Monitoring and Controlling]
        PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 383
        PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Monitoring and
        Controlling, 9, Task 7

22. d. Both parties meet contractual obligations and protect their legal rights
        Contracts are awarded to obtain goods and services in accordance with
        the buyer's stated requirements. Although there are multiple purposes
        in the Control Procurements process, ensuring that the seller delivers
        what is stated in the contract is of paramount importance. This process
        involves managing procurement relationships, monitoring contract per-
        formance, and making changes and corrections to contracts as needed.
        [Monitoring and Controlling]
        PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 379
        PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Monitoring and
        Controlling, 9, Task 7

23. b. Resource calendars
        They are an output of Conduct Procurements as the quantity and availabil-
        ity of contracted resources and the dates on which each specific resource
        or resource group can be active or is idle is documented. [Executing]
        PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 378
        PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Executing, 8, Task 2

24. b. Requirements traceability matrix
        Other documents to update are the requirements documents and the
        risk register. The procurement management plan can later include certain
        requirements that may not have been considered at the time a traceability
        matrix is prepared. It is important in that it helps ensure each requirement
        adds business value by linking it to the business and project requirements.
        Each procurement statement of work, for example, contains requirements
        that the seller must meet; such other requirements as for-performance
        bonds or insurance contracts and directions to sellers on developing a
        WBS are part of the procurement management plan. [Planning]
        PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 118-119, 367, 370
        PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Planning, 6, Task 7
266      PMP(R) Exam Practice Test and Study Guide


          25. c. Firm-fixed-price
                   In a firm-fixed-price contract, the seller receives a fixed sum of money
                   for the work performed regardless of costs. This arrangement places the
                   greatest financial risk on the seller and encourages it to control costs.
                   Any cost increase because of adverse performance is the responsibil-
                   ity of the seller, who is obligated to complete the effort. The buyer
                   should precisely state the products or services to be procured as any
                   changes to the procurement specification can increase the buyer's cost.
                   [Planning]
                   Adams et al., Principles of Project Management, 1997, 229
                   PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 363
                   PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Planning, 6, Task 7

          26. a. Alternative dispute resolution
                   Alternative dispute resolution, or dispute resolution, is a relatively infor-
                   mal way to address differences of opinion on contracts. Its purpose
                   is to address such issues without having to seek formal legal redress
                   through the courts. It is a method that can be defined in advance as
                   part of the procurement award in Conduct Procurements. In terms of
                   claims administration, a tool and technique in Control Procurements, it
                   is an approach to resolve a claim if the buyer and seller cannot agree.
                   It also is used in procurement negotiations, a tool and technique in
                   Close Procurements, if an equitable settlement cannot be reached on
                   outstanding issues, claims, or disputes. [Executing, Monitoring and
                   Controlling, and Closing]
                   PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 378, 384, 388
                   PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Executing, 8, Task 2
                   PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Monitoring and
                   Controlling, 9, Task 7
                   PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Closing, 11, Task 3

          27. a. Whether quality standards are being satisfied
                   Work performance data are an input to Control Procurements.
                   Additionally these data show costs that have been incurred or commit-
                   ted, as well as identification of the seller invoices that have been paid.
                   Answer b refers to approved change requests, a separate input to this
                   process, while answers c and d refer to work performance information,
                   an output from this process. [Monitoring and Controlling]
                   PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 382
                   PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Monitoring and
                   Controlling, 9, Task 7
                                                      Project Procurement Management       267


28. d. Responsibility to acquire professional licenses
        Attention must also be given to the responsibility to obtain or hold any
        required permits. They all may affect the type of contract to award, and
        they may be required by legislation, regulation, or organizational policy
        to execute the project. [Planning]
        PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 360
        PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Planning, 6, Task 7

29. c. $39,000
        To calculate the fee that the buyer must pay, actual costs are compared
        with the target cost. If actual costs are less than the target cost, the
        seller will earn profit that is additional to the target profit. If actual costs
        are more than the target cost, the seller will lose profit from the tar-
        get profit. The amount of profit is determined by the share ratio (with
        the buyer's share listed first). In this example, the seller is under target
        cost by $30,000. That amount will be split 70/30. So the buyer keeps
        $21,000, and the seller receives an additional $9,000 added to the target
        profit, which is the incentive. Total fee is $39,000. In this type of con-
        tract the buyer and seller have flexibility that allows for deviations from
        performance with financial incentives in place tied to agreed-upon met-
        rics. These incentives tend to be related to cost, schedule, and technical
        performance. The performance targets are established at the beginning.
        The price ceiling is set, and all costs above the price are the seller's
        responsibility. [Planning]
        PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 363
        PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Planning, 6, Task 7

30. a. Contract
        Agreements are an output of Conduct Procurements. They may be
        called an understanding, a contract, a subcontract, or a purchase order.
        A contract is a legal agreement subject to remedy in the courts. An
        agreement has multiple major components including acceptance criteria.
        [Executing]
        PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 377
        PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Executing, 8, Task 2
268    PMP(R) Exam Practice Test and Study Guide


          31. c. The accounts payable system
                  After certification of the seller's satisfactory work by an authorized
                  person on the project team, payments to the seller are processed by the
                  buyer's accounts payable system. All payments are made according to
                  the terms of the contract. [Monitoring and Controlling]
                  PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 383
                  PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Monitoring and
                  Controlling, 9, Task 7

          32. b. Past performance
                  Analytical techniques are a tool and technique in Conduct
                  Procurements. The goal is that procurements involve a way vendors can
                  bring value through their offerings. These analytical techniques help
                  organizations identify the readiness of a vendor to provide the desired
                  end state, determine the needed cost, and avoid cost overruns. By
                  examining past performance teams may identify areas that have more
                  risk and need to be monitored more closely. [Executing]
                  PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 376
                  PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Executing, 8, Task 2

          33. b. Organizational process assets
                  They are an input to Control Procurements. This example is one of a
                  prior arrangement. After the buyer and seller work collectively to pre-
                  pare a statement of work to satisfy the requirements, they negotiate a
                  final contract to award. Other organizational process assets are listings
                  of prospective and previously qualified sellers and information on rel-
                  evant positive and negative experiences with sellers. [Executing]
                  PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 375
                  PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Executing, 8, Task 2

          34. c. Negotiation
                  While there are a variety of ways to settle claims, disputes, and
                  changes, the preferred approach is negotiation. It is a strategy to work
                  toward compromise or to reach an agreement that both parties can
                  accept. Claims administration is a tool and technique in the Control
                  Procurement process. If the parties cannot negotiate among themselves,
                  alternative dispute resolution is the next step, following specified proce-
                  dures in the contract. [Monitoring and Controlling]
                  PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 384, 517
                  PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Monitoring and
                  Controlling, 9, Task 7
                                                 Project Procurement Management    269


35. b. A constructive change to the contract
       This situation is a constructive change to the contract. These construc-
       tive changes may be disputed by one party and can lead to a claim
       against the other party. These changes are uniquely identified and
       documented by project correspondence. Change requests are an output
       of Control Procurements and are processed for review and approval
       through the Integrated Change Control process. [Monitoring and
       Controlling]
       PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 385
       PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Monitoring and
       Controlling, 9, Task 7

36. a. Negotiated a draft contract
       Selected sellers are an output of Conduct Procurements. These selected
       sellers are ones in a competitive range based on the proposal or bid
       evaluation. They have negotiated a draft contract that will be the actual
       contract after an award is made. Typically approval of high-value, high-
       risk, complex procurements generally require approval by senior man-
       agers prior to award. [Executing]
       PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 377
       PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Executing, 8, Task 2

37. d. Your procurement management plan may define processes to follow
       internal to the organization
       Make-or-buy decisions are an output to Plan Procurement Management.
       If the decision is to make the item, then the procurement management
       plan may define processes and agreements to follow internal to the
       organization. If the decision is to buy, the next step is to reach agree-
       ment with a seller for the product, service, or results. [Planning]
       PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 370
       PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Planning, 6, Task 7

38. b. Follow the scope baseline
       The procurement statement of work is an output of Plan Procurement
       Management. The statement of work for each procurement is developed
       from the project scope baseline and defines the portion of the project's
       scope to be included within the related contract The other possible
       answers are items that are part of the procurement management plan.
       [Planning]
       PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 367
       PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Planning, 6, Task 7
270    PMP(R) Exam Practice Test and Study Guide


        39. b. Cost-plus-fixed-fee
                 On a firm-fixed-price contract, the seller absorbs 100 percent of the
                 risks; while on a cost-type contract, the buyer carries the most risk.
                 Cost-reimbursable contracts provide flexibility to the project to redirect
                 the seller whenever the scope of work cannot be precisely defined at
                 the start and needs to be altered or when high risks may exist in the
                 effort. Cost-plus-fixed-fee contracts have less risk to sellers than cost-
                 plus-award-fee or cost-plus-incentive-fee contracts because the fee is
                 fixed based on costs, so the seller is guaranteed a certain level of profit.
                 The fee is paid only for completed work and does not change unless
                 the project scope changes. [Planning]
                 PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 363-364
                 PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Planning, 6, Task 7

        40. b. $90,000
                 In this situation the fixed-fee of $10,000 does not change but now
                 represents a seller profit of 12.5 percent on incurred costs. This means
                 that the total cost to the project is $90,000. The actual fee is determined
                 when the seller completes its work. [Planning]
                 Fleming, Q.W., Project Procurement Management Contracting,
                 Subcontracting, Teaming, 2003, 97
                 PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 363-364
                 PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Planning, 6, Task 7
Project Stakeholder
Management


Study Hints
Project Stakeholder Management was added as a tenth knowledge area in the
PMBOK(R) Guide--Fifth Edition. The four processes cover four of the five pro-
cesses in the PMP(R) certification exam. Stakeholder management is expanded
because identifying and analyzing stakeholder expectations and their impact
on the project and developing management techniques to effectively engage
stakeholders in project decisions and execution are critical to project success.
The project manager and his or her team must have a continuous dialogue with
stakeholders to meet their needs and expectations, address any issues they may
have, and foster the level of appropriate stakeholder engagement in project deci-
sions and activities.
    With Project Stakeholder Management as a separate knowledge area, the
importance of working with stakeholders on a project is emphasized. It involves
focusing on managing the expectations of the project's stakeholder groups and
engaging them in the project as appropriate. Research in the project management
field further has shown that stakeholder engagement is one of the major keys to
project success.
    Questions in this knowledge area will address the key stakeholders on proj-
ects, as well as areas covered in its four process groups. The four processes not
only interact with one another but also interact with processes in the other nine
knowledge areas. You need to study these processes carefully to become familiar
with PMI(R)'s terminology and perspectives. PMBOK(R) Guide Figure 13-1 provides
an overview of the structure of Project Stakeholder Management. Know this chart
thoroughly.
    Following is a list of the major Project Stakeholder Management topics. Use it
to help focus your study efforts on the areas most likely to appear on the exam.


                                                                              271
                                                 Project Stakeholder Management      273


Major Topics
Stakeholder definition
Types of stakeholders on projects
Identify stakeholders

   Stakeholder analysis
   Preparation
   Classification models
   Meetings
   Stakeholder register

Plan stakeholder management

   Project management plan
   Organizational process assets
   Enterprise environmental factors
   Expert judgment
   Analytical techniques
   Stakeholder engagement assessment matrix
   Contents of the stakeholder management plan

Manage stakeholder engagement

   Key activities
   Communications management pan
   Change log
   Communications methods
   Interpersonal skills
   Management skills
   Issue log
   Organizational process assets updates

Control stakeholder engagement

   Work performance data
   Information management systems
   Work performance information
   Change requests
                                                   Project Stakeholder Management      275


Practice Questions
   INSTRUCTIONS: Note the most suitable answer for each multiple-choice
   question in the appropriate space on the answer sheet.


 1. During your project, you will have a number of different types of meetings.
    Some will be informational, others will be key updates, and some will be
    for decision-making purposes. While different attendees will attend each
    meeting, a best practice to follow is to:
   a. Group stakeholders into categories to determine which ones should
      attend each meeting
   b. Invite those stakeholders who have a high level of interest in your project
      to attend each meeting
   c. Be sensitive to the fact that stakeholders often have very different
      objectives
   d. Recognize that roles and responsibilities may overlap but practice a
      policy of `no surprises' and inform your stakeholders about any upcom-
      ing meetings

 2. You are managing a project with team members located at customer sites
    on three different continents. You have a number of stakeholders on your
    project, and most of them are located outside of the corporate office. Who
    should be responsible for stakeholder management?
   a.   A specific team member in each of the three locations
   b.   You, because you are the project manager
   c.   The project sponsor
   d.   A core team including you, as the project manager, and three representa-
        tives from the three different locations

 3. Analyzing stakeholders is a part of the Identify Stakeholders process.
    Common approaches for analyzing stakeholders in a qualitative manner
    includes all the following two-axis grids, EXCEPT--
   a.   Comparing   power and influence
   b.   Comparing   power and interest
   c.   Comparing   influence and location
   d.   Comparing   influence and impact
276      PMP(R) Exam Practice Test and Study Guide


           4. You are responsible for a project in your organization that has multiple
              internal customers. Because many people in your organization are interested
              in this project, you decide to prepare a stakeholder management strategy.
              Before preparing this strategy, you should--
             a. Conduct a stakeholder analysis to assess information needs
             b. Determine a production schedule to show when each stakeholder needs
                each type of information produced
             c. Determine the potential impact that each stakeholder may generate
             d. Prioritize each stakeholder's level of interest and influence

           5. Recognizing the importance of preparing a stakeholder management
              plan, you met with your team to obtain their buy in and to discuss it. You
              explained the key benefit of Plan Stakeholder Management is to--
             a. Determine appropriate strategies for a continual focus on identifying
                stakeholders throughout the life cycle
             b. Provide a clear plan that is actionable to interact with stakeholders to
                support the project's interests
             c. Develop appropriate management strategies to effectively engage
                stakeholders
             d. Plan a series of meetings to ensure stakeholders remain interested and to
                address their concerns

           6. Assume you are actively working, along with your team, to manage stake-
              holder engagement on your project to develop a new drug to prevent any
              retina problems of any type. You know you must manage their engagement
              throughout the project life cycle. This means some organizational process
              assets will need updating including--
             a.   Informal and formal project reports
             b.   The stakeholder register
             c.   The stakeholder management plan
             d.   Work performance information

           7. Stakeholders often have issues, and you have asked each of your team mem-
              bers to document them. At each team meeting, you and your team discuss
              them and determine appropriate responses. You have a project issue log,
              which is--
             a.   Part of the project's lessons learned
             b.   Added to the stakeholder register to show which stakeholder raised it
             c.   An output from the Manage Stakeholder Engagement process
             d.   An output from the Control Stakeholder Engagement process
                                                    Project Stakeholder Management       277


8. As you work on your project to update its software training classes to focus
   on an agile approach, you have a number of key stakeholders. As many
   people and their managers are requesting these classes, your CEO has taken
   a special interest in your project and has asked you to accelerate your sched-
   ule to complete it in two months, rather than in your planned six months,
   and still have quality offerings. This means as you work to monitor overall
   project stakeholder relationships, you should--
   a.   Provide notifications to stakeholders about status regularly
   b.   Ask your stakeholders for regular feedback as you work on your project
   c.   Provide presentations to each stakeholder group
   d.   Determine how changes will be monitored and controlled

 9. As you work with your team to prepare your stakeholder management plan,
    you decided to develop a stakeholder engagement chart. You set it up so
    you can--
   a. Show the phase of your project of interest to identified stakeholders
   b. Show gaps between current and desired levels of engagement
   c. Determine which stakeholders you and your team felt were critical to
      project success but did not know about it
   d. Determine when to involve key stakeholders in your project

10. A number of items in the stakeholder management plan are similar to those
    in the communications management plan. An example is--
   a. Method for updating and refining the plans as the project progresses and
      develops
   b. Stakeholder communication requirements for the current project phase
   c. Information to be distributed to stakeholders including language, format,
      content, and level of detail
   d. Time frame and frequency for the distribution of required information to
      stakeholders

11. Having worked as a project manager for nine years, you know how impor-
    tant it is to identify the critical stakeholders and not to overlook anyone who
    has a major influence on your project, even if you do not ever plan to meet
    with or talk with this individual. As you work with your team, you explain
    the key benefit of the Identify Stakeholder Process is that it--
   a. Identifies the people, groups, or organizations that could impact or influ-
      ence project decisions
   b. Shows the interdependencies among project stakeholders to enable clas-
      sification for how best to involve them on your project
   c. Identifies the appropriate focus for each stakeholder or a group of
      stakeholders
   d. Shows the potential impact each stakeholder has on project success
278    PMP(R) Exam Practice Test and Study Guide


       12. The last step in the stakeholder analysis process is to--
           a.   Determine the organizational culture
           b.   Assess how stakeholders probably will respond in various situations
           c.   Determine stakeholder roles, interests, and expectations
           d.   Evaluate the amount of support each stakeholder could generate

        13. You realize that on projects, some stakeholders will not be as receptive as
            others to your project and actually can be negative from the beginning.
            Assume you have classified your stakeholders on your project designed to
            ensure students in your city have access to the best educational resources
            available, whether in class or on line. Your stakeholder management plan is
            a sensitive document. Therefore, you need to--
           a. Tell your team to never disclose it to anyone outside the team without
              consulting you first
           b. Involve your team as you develop it but maintain the final copy yourself
           c. Review the validity of its underlying assumptions
           d. Set up an information distribution system and have each team member
              sign it for concurrence

        14. Stakeholder engagement involves a number of critical activities. An
            example is--
           a. Ensuring goals are met through negotiation and communications
           b. Developing management strategies to engage them during the project's
              life cycle
           c. Adjusting strategies and plans to engage stakeholders effectively
           d. Identifying the scope and impact of changes to project stakeholders

        15. Work performance information is an output of Control Stakeholder
            Engagement. It includes a number of items, one of which is--
           a.   Change requests
           b.   Issue log
           c.   Documented lessons learned
           d.   Status of deliverables
                                                   Project Stakeholder Management       279


16. Often in working as a project manager, it is easy to overlook key stakehold-
    ers. Assume you work for a device manufacturer and are working as the
    project manager for the next generation valve replacement. Your company
    has been a leader in this market, which means you have a lot of lessons
    learned available to you. Your project is scheduled to last four years. As a
    best practice, you should--
   a.   Work actively with your company's Knowledge Management Officer
   b.   Consult regularly with your program manager
   c.   Work actively with members of your Governance Board
   d.   Work actively with members of your company's Portfolio Review Board

17. Assume you are managing the development of a construction project in your
    city to replace its five bridges so they are state of the art and meet updated
    safety standards because they originally were constructed 20 years ago.
    The design work has been completed. You have awarded subcontracts and
    are set to begin construction. Today your legal department told you to stop
    work as you had not consulted them, and there was a critical standard you
    overlooked during the design process. This example shows--
   a. You need to continually work to engage stakeholders on your project
   b. You should use a RACI chart and have one of your team members work
      with the legal department throughout the project
   c. You should provide the legal department with a copy of your stakeholder
      management plan and ask for their representative to sign it and offer any
      comments
   d. You need to continually identify project stakeholders

18. Assume your construction project is for a small city with only 8,500 people.
    There has been opposition by many residents to it from the beginning,
    when the city commissioners approved it. The residents recognize they will
    be severely impacted as the new bridges are implemented, and during the
    public hearings before the commissioners' decision, they hired an attorney
    to state they felt the more cost effective approach was to strengthen the
    bridges so they met today's safety requirements. Residents now know you
    have been ordered to stop work, and they have requested a meeting with
    the commission on Tuesday. This means you should--
   a. Develop a mitigation plan to present at this meeting
   b. Work diligently with the legal department to satisfy their concerns and
      receive a go ahead before Tuesday's meeting
   c. Demonstrate at the meeting the sustainability impacts of the new bridges
   d. Balance the interests of these negative stakeholders and meet with them
      before Tuesday's meeting
280      PMP(R) Exam Practice Test and Study Guide


          19. The salience model is one way to classify stakeholders. In it--
             a.   Stakeholders'   power, urgency, and legitimacy are used
             b.   Stakeholders'   level of authority and concern are used
             c.   Stakeholders'   active involvement and power are used
             d.   Stakeholders'   influence and ability to effect changes are used

         20. In Plan Stakeholder Management, all organizational assets are used as
             inputs; however, which of the following are of particular importance?
             a.   Organization culture and the political climate
             b.   Practices and habits and templates
             c.   Lessons learned database and historical information
             d.   Organization's knowledge management system and policies and
                  procedures

          21. Assume you have identified your stakeholders and are preparing your
              stakeholder management plan. You are fortunate that your team is a
              colocated team as you are working on an internal project to reorganize your
              IT Department so it is focused more on its customers. The project sponsor is
              the Chief Operating Officer, and the IT Department Director was surprised
              as she thought all was well. However, you notice when planning meetings
              are held, the Chief Financial Officer never attends. You believe that IT affects
              the entire company and therefore all the senior leaders need some type of
              involvement. You therefore feel the Chief Financial Officer may be--
             a.   Resistant
             b.   Unaware
             c.   Uninterested
             d.   Satisfied

         22. Assume your stakeholder management plan has been approved. You now
             are working with your team to promote stakeholder engagement on your
             project. You explain in a team meeting its benefit is to--
             a.   Clarify and resolve identified issues
             b.   Meet stakeholder needs and expectations
             c.   Obtain their continued commitment to the project
             d.   Increase support and minimize resistance

         23. The stakeholder register should not be prepared only one time, but it should
             be updated regularly especially if--
             a.   The   stakeholder   is not an active participant
             b.   The   stakeholder   is not impacted by the project
             c.   The   stakeholder   does not read status updates
             d.   The   stakeholder   leads a corporate reorganization
                                                        Project Stakeholder Management      281


24. You are a project manager working to foster stakeholder engagement, and
    you know a combination of interpersonal skills and general management
    skills is needed. An example of a key interpersonal skill in stakeholder
    engagement is--
   a.   Facilitating consensus
   b.   Influencing people
   c.   Resolving conflicts
   d.   Negotiating agreements

25. Stakeholder engagement must be controlled on a continuous basis for it to
    be effective. You realize a number of project documents can be useful for
    you as a project manager. An example is--
   a.   Technical performance measures
   b.   Change log
   c.   Actual costs
   d.   Start and finish dates of schedule activities

26. Expert judgment is a best practice as a tool and technique in many project
    management processes, and the list of possible sources for experts varies by
    the organization and by its association with others. Once you have identified
    experts who you feel could be of assistance, you can--
   a.   Use a focus group
   b.   Review documentation
   c.   Hold brainstorming sessions with your team
   d.   Conduct interviews

27. Enterprise environmental factors are useful in many projects. In Plan
    Stakeholder Management an example of one of particular importance is--
   a. Lessons learned
   b. Templates from previous stakeholder management plans from successful
      projects
   c. Benchmarking
   d. Organizational culture

28. Stakeholder management involves more than improving communications
    and requires more than just managing a team. This is because it--
   a. Contains detailed plans to ensure stakeholder requirements are satisfied
   b. Describes how to best meet human resource requirements
   c. Creates and maintains relationships between the project team and
      stakeholders
   d. Focuses on active participation of all stakeholders, even the resistors to
      the project
282  PMP(R) Exam Practice Test and Study Guide


         29. Assume you are beginning your project to develop a series of residential
             condominiums in your city and are identifying possible stakeholders. A key
             organizational process asset you can review is--
            a.   Organizational culture
            b.   Organizational standards
            c.   Lessons learned
            d.   Local trends

         30. One way to develop an understanding of major project stakeholders to
             exchange and analyze project information about roles and interests is to--
            a.   Conduct interviews
            b.   Hold profile analysis meetings
            c.   Use questionnaires and surveys
            d.   Conduct a stakeholder analysis and analyze the results with a focus group

         31. Assume you are managing a project to implement an electronic medical
             record system in your ophthalmologist's office. You have been working to
             identify your stakeholders to then make sure everyone is committed to it as
             some people have been working in this office for more than 20 years and
             are comfortable with the manual approach. At this point, you have docu-
             mented assessment information, which includes--
            a.   Role in the project
            b.   Whether the stakeholder is a supporter, is neutral, or is resistant
            c.   Potential influence in the project
            d.   Organization position

         32. Having prepared stakeholder management plans on previous projects, you
             know it is positive to review the project management plan because it--
            a. Provides information as to how to plan appropriate ways to engage
               stakeholders
            b. Contains information useful to ensure the stakeholder management plan
               is aligned with the organization's culture
            c. Helps to determine the best options to support an adaptive process for
               stakeholder management
            d. Contains a change management plan and documents how changes will
               be monitored and controlled
                                                      Project Stakeholder Management       283


33. Assume you have performed your stakeholder analysis and now are working
    to enhance it with a stakeholder engagement assessment matrix. Such a matrix
    shows the stakeholder's current engagement level. These data enable--
   a.   The   project   manager to prepare the stakeholder management plan
   b.   The   project   manager to prepare the stakeholder management strategy
   c.   The   project   manager to prepare the stakeholder inventory
   d.   The   project   team to expand the stakeholder risk register

34. The ability of stakeholders to influence a project is--
   a. Constant throughout the project life cycle as different stakeholders have
      different levels of interest in the project at different times
   b. Highest during the closing stage since key stakeholder acceptance criteria
      must be met
   c. Highest during planning as the team is still in the storming stage as vari-
      ous stakeholders' positions are being known and recognized
   d. Highest in the very early stages as the project is being approved and
      initiated

35. Working on your project to design and construct five new bridges for your
    City, you are striving to actively manage the stakeholders on your project,
    especially those who will be inconvenienced by the project and have indi-
    cated they do not support it. You decided to review your communications
    management plan as it--
   a.   Contains issue management procedures
   b.   Describes the project's life cycle and the processes to be used in each phase
   c.   Sets forth an escalation process
   d.   Provides guidance as to how to best involve stakeholders in the project

36. A supporting input for controlling stakeholder engagement is--
   a.   Budget
   b.   Project schedule
   c.   Historical information
   d.   Number of defects

37. As a result of the Control Stakeholder Engagement process, you realize even
    though this process is under way until the closing phase that you have
    identified the root cause of some issues you have faced in controlling stake-
    holders expectations. You should therefore--
   a.   Review them with your Governance Board
   b.   Revise and reissue your stakeholder management plan
   c.   Prepare a change request
   d.   Update the lessons learned documentation
284      PMP(R) Exam Practice Test and Study Guide


         38. Identifying interrelationships and potential overlap between stakeholders
             is useful to the project manager as he or she works with stakeholders.
             It should be documented as part of the--
             a.   Stakeholder   register
             b.   Stakeholder   management strategy
             c.   Stakeholder   management plan
             d.   Stakeholder   engagement assessment matrix

         39. A number of organizational process assets are useful as inputs to the
             Manage Stakeholder Engagement process. Similarly a number of organiza-
             tional process assets require updates because of this process. An example of
             one that is an input is--
             a.   Project reports
             b.   Historical information
             c.   Project records
             d.   Stakeholder notifications

         40. Table reporting, spreadsheet analysis, and presentations are examples of--
             a. Project reports as an input to Manage Stakeholder Engagement
             b. Work performance information as an output of Control Stakeholder
                Engagement
             c. Tools and techniques used in Control Stakeholder Engagement
             d. Updates from the Plan Stakeholder Management process
                                         Project Stakeholder Management      285


Answer Sheet

1.    a   b    c   d   21.   a   b   c      d

2.    a   b    c   d   22.   a   b   c      d

3.    a   b    c   d   23.   a   b   c      d

4.    a   b    c   d   24.   a   b   c      d

5.    a   b    c   d   25.   a   b   c      d

6.    a   b    c   d   26.   a   b   c      d

7.    a   b    c   d   27.   a   b   c      d

8.    a   b    c   d   28.   a   b   c      d

9.    a   b    c   d   29.   a   b   c      d

10.   a   b    c   d   30.   a   b   c      d

11.   a   b    c   d   31.   a   b   c      d

12.   a   b    c   d   32.   a   b   c      d

13.   a   b    c   d   33.   a   b   c      d

14.   a   b    c   d   34.   a   b   c      d

15.   a   b    c   d   35.   a   b   c      d

16.   a   b    c   d   36.   a   b   c      d

17.   a   b    c   d   37.   a   b   c      d

18.   a   b    c   d   38.   a   b   c      d

19.   a   b    c   d   39.   a   b   c      d

20.   a   b    c   d   40.   a   b   c      d
                                                   Project Stakeholder Management       287


Answer Key
 1. c. Be sensitive to the fact that different stakeholders often have very
       different objectives
        A project stakeholder is an individual, group, or organization that is
        actively involved in the project or have interests that may be affected,
        either positively or negatively, as a result of the performance or comple-
        tion of the project. Stakeholders also may exert influence on the proj-
        ect and its results. Managing stakeholder expectations is difficult since
        stakeholders often have different or conflicting objectives. [Monitoring
        and Controlling]
        PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 30
        PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Monitoring and
        Controlling, 9, Task 1

 2. b. You, because you are the project manager
        Stakeholder management refers to any action taken by the project man-
        ager or project team to satisfy the needs of and to resolve issues with
        project stakeholders. The ability of the project manager to correctly
        identify and manage stakeholders appropriately can mean the difference
        between project success and failure. [Monitoring and Controlling]
        PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 391
        PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Monitoring and
        Controlling, 9, Task 1

 3. c. Comparing influence and location
        Identifying and analyzing the stakeholders helps to classify them better
        for developing a strategy to help manage them and their expectations
        throughout the project. The most common comparison elements are:
        power, influence, interest, and impact. The location of the person may
        have an impact on one of the other measures, but it is not easily quan-
        tifiable on a low-, medium-, high-type scale. [Initiating]
        PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 396
        PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Initiating, 5, Task 3
288      PMP(R) Exam Practice Test and Study Guide


           4. a. Conduct a stakeholder analysis to assess information needs
                   Stakeholder analysis is used to analyze the information needs of the
                   stakeholders and to determine the sources for meeting those needs.
                   It helps to determine whose interests should be taken into account
                   throughout the project. It is a tool and technique in the Identify
                   Stakeholders process. [Initiating]
                   PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 395-396
                   PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Initiating, 5, Task 3

           5. b. Provide a clear plan that is actionable to interact with stakeholders to
                 support the project's interests
                   While the Plan Stakeholder Management process develops appropriate
                   management strategies to effectively engage the stakeholders during the
                   project life cycle, the key benefit of this process is to have a plan that
                   is clear and actionable to interact with them to support the project's
                   interests. [Planning]
                   PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 399
                   PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Planning, 6, Task 13

           6. a. Informal and formal project reports
                   While a number of different organizational process assets require
                   updates as a result of the Manage Stakeholder Engagement process,
                   project reports is one example. They include the formal and informal
                   project reports that describe project status and include lessons learned,
                   issue logs, project closure reports, and outputs from other knowledge
                   areas. Other organizational process assets that may require updates are
                   stakeholder notifications, project presentations, project records, feed-
                   back from stakeholders, and lessons learned documentation. [Executing]
                   PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 409
                   PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Executing, 8, Task 7

           7. c. An output from the Manage Stakeholder Engagement process
                   Issues logs are an output of this process, as issues are expected in this
                   process. The log is updated as new issues are identified, and existing
                   issues are resolved. Other outputs are: change requests, updates to the
                   project management plan, updates to project documents, and updates
                   to organizational process assets. [Executing]
                   PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 408-409
                   PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Executing, 8, Task 7
                                                  Project Stakeholder Management      289


 8. d. Determine how changes will be monitored and controlled
       As you work in managing stakeholder engagement you should review
       your project management plan. Your CEO has requested a major sched-
       ule change; among other things the project management plan is an
       input to this process as it contains a change management plan that doc-
       uments how changes will be monitored and controlled. It also describes
       the project life cycle and the processes for each phase, the work to
       accomplish project objectives, how human resource requirements will
       be met, and needs and techniques to communicate among stakeholders.
       [Monitoring and Controlling]
       PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 411
       PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Monitoring and
       Controlling, 9, Task 1

 9. b. Show gaps between current and desired levels of engagement
       The stakeholder engagement assessment matrix is used as a tool and
       technique in Plan Stakeholder Management. The purpose of the matrix
       is to show gaps between current and desired engagement levels to then
       ensure the plan provides these data. Review Figure 13-7 in the PMBOK(R)
       Guide, 2013 for an example. [Planning]
       PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 402-403
       PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Planning, 6, Task 13

10. a. Method for updating and refining the plans as the project progresses
       and develops
       The other items listed have specific stakeholder references that, while
       similar, are not in the communications management plan. This is
       because the stakeholder management plan's focus is to have a man-
       agement strategy to effectively engage stakeholders on the project. In
       contrast, the emphasis of the communications management plan is
       to describe how project communications will be planned, structured,
       monitored, and controlled. [Planning]
       PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 296, 403
       PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Planning, 6, Task 13
290      PMP(R) Exam Practice Test and Study Guide


          11. c. Identifies the appropriate focus for each stakeholder or a group of
                 stakeholders
                   The Identify Stakeholder process has a number of purposes. It identifies
                   people, groups, or organizations that could impact or be impacted by a
                   decision, activity, or outcome of the project. It analyzes and documents
                   relevant information concerning their interests, involvement, interde-
                   pendencies, influence and potential impact on project success. Its key
                   benefit is to allow the project manager to identify the appropriate focus
                   for each stakeholder. [Initiating]
                   PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 393
                   PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Initiating, 5, Task 3

          12. b. Assess how stakeholders probably will respond in various situations
                   In stakeholder analysis, the last step is to assess how key stakeholders
                   are likely to react or respond to various situations in order to plan how
                   to influence them to enhance their support and mitigate any potential
                   negative impacts. The first step is to identify the relevant stakeholders,
                   and the second step involves analyzing their potential impact or sup-
                   port. Note: as you study for the PMP(R) exam, recognize when steps in a
                   process are discussed, such as in this question, it is important to know
                   the steps as you may see a question such as this one or one about the
                   first step in the process. [Initiating]
                   PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 396
                   PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Initiating, 5, Task 3

          13. c. Review the validity of its underlying assumptions
                   Information on resistant stakeholders can be damaging, and consider-
                   ation is needed regarding distributing the stakeholder management plan
                   and the stakeholder register. The project manager needs to be aware of
                   the sensitive nature of these documents. When preparing and updat-
                   ing them, the best practice is to review the underlying assumptions to
                   ensure continued accuracy and relevancy. [Planning]
                   PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 404
                   PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Planning, 6, Task 13
                                                  Project Stakeholder Management      291


14. a. Ensuring goals are met through negotiation and communications
       A key activity in Manage Stakeholder Engagement is to manage stake-
       holder expectations through negotiation and communications, ensuring
       project goals are achieved. This process focuses on communicating with
       stakeholders and working with them to meet their needs or expecta-
       tions, addressing issues as they occur, and fostering appropriate engage-
       ment in project activities throughout the project. [Executing]
       PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 404-405
       PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Executing, 8, Task 7

15. d. Status of deliverables
       Work performance information is performance data collected from vari-
       ous controlling processes that are analyzed and integrated based on
       relationships among areas. The data are transformed into information,
       which is correlated and contextualized and provides a sound foundation
       for project decisions. The status of deliverables is an example. Other
       examples include implementation status for change requests and fore-
       casted estimates to complete. [Monitoring and Controlling]
       PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 413
       PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Monitoring and
       Controlling, 9, Task 1

16. c. Work actively with members of your Governance Board
       New product development organizations are noted for setting up
       Governance Boards to oversee projects. Additionally in this situation, it
       is a long project that is important to the company. Project governance
       ensures the alignment of the project with stakeholder needs and expec-
       tations and is critical to the management of stakeholder expectations
       and to the achievement of organizational objectives. [Executing]
       PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 30
       PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Executing, 8, Task 7
292    PMP(R) Exam Practice Test and Study Guide


        17. d. You need to continually identify project stakeholders
                 Stakeholder identification is a continual process throughout the project
                 life cycle. The legal department often is overlooked, but it is a sig-
                 nificant stakeholder, and in this situation, delays resulted. Significant
                 expenses often are due to legal requirements that must be met before
                 the project can be completed, or the project scope is delivered. As an
                 output of Identify Stakeholders, the stakeholder register should be con-
                 sulted and updated; stakeholders may change, or new stakeholders will
                 be identified. These updates continue throughout the project. [Initiating]
                 PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 31, 398
                 PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Initiating, 5, Task 3

        18. d. Balance the interests of these negative stakeholders and meet with them
               before Tuesday's meeting
                 Overlooking negative stakeholders' interests can result in an increased
                 likelihood of failures, delays, or other negative consequences to proj-
                 ects. The project manager must control stakeholder engagement, which
                 can be difficult since they often have different or competing objec-
                 tives. The key benefit of the Control Stakeholder Engagement process
                 is to maintain or increase the effectiveness of stakeholder engagement
                 activities as the project evolves and the project environment changes.
                 Therefore, it is necessary to monitor stakeholder relationships and
                 adjust strategies and plans to engage stakeholders. [Monitoring and
                 Controlling]
                 PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 32, 409
                 PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Monitoring and
                 Controlling, 9, Task 1

        19. a. Stakeholders' power, urgency, and legitimacy are used
                 In the salience model, stakeholders are described in classes based on
                 their power or ability to impose their will, urgency or need for immedi-
                 ate action, and legitimacy or their involvement. It is an approach used
                 for stakeholder analysis, along with power/interest, power/influence,
                 and influence/impact. Stakeholder analysis is a tool and technique in
                 Identify Stakeholders. [Initiating]
                 PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 396
                 PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Initiating, 5, Task 3
                                                    Project Stakeholder Management        293


20. c. Lessons learned database and historical information
       While it is rare that all organizational process assets are used in any
       process, these are of particular importance as they provide insight on
       previous stakeholder management plans and their effectiveness. They
       can be used to plan stakeholder management activities for the current
       project. [Planning]
       PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 401
       PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Planning, 6, Task 13

21. a. Resistant
       Since the Chief Financial Officer has financial responsibility for all of
       the company's work, in preparing a stakeholder engagement strategy,
       he or she probably is aware of this project, and probably is resistant to
       change, perhaps feeling resources could be better spent on other initia-
       tives. Analytical techniques are a tool and technique in Plan Stakeholder
       Management. Other ways to classify stakeholder engagement levels are:
       unaware, neutral, supportive, or leading. [Planning]
       PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 402
       PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Planning, 6, Task 13

22. d. Increase support and minimize resistance
       The other possible answers are activities in the Manage Stakeholder
       Engagement process. Its benefit is to allow the project manager to
       increase support and minimize resistance from stakeholders to signifi-
       cantly increase chances for success. [Executing]
       PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 404-405
       PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Executing, 8, Task 7

23. b. The stakeholder is not impacted by the project
       Project document updates are an output to the Manage Stakeholder
       Engagement process. These updates involve the stakeholder register.
       It should be updated as stakeholder information changes, when new
       stakeholders are identified, or if stakeholders listed in the register are no
       longer involved in or impacted by the project. [Executing]
       PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 409
       PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Executing, 8, Task 7
294    PMP(R) Exam Practice Test and Study Guide


          24. c. Resolving conflicts
                  Conflicts are common on projects and between stakeholders. Other
                  interpersonal skills useful in Manage Stakeholder Engagement are
                  building trust, active listening and overcoming resistance to change.
                  The other answers are examples of management sills, another tool and
                  technique in this process. [Executing]
                  PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 407-408
                  PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Executing, 8, Task 7

          25. b. Change log
                  Projects involve change, and most everyone tends to resist it. A change
                  log is a project document to review as an input to the Control
                  Stakeholder Engagement process. Other useful documents are the
                  schedule, stakeholder register, issue log, and project communications.
                  The other answers to this question are examples of work performance
                  data, another input to this process. [Monitoring and Controlling]
                  PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 412-413
                  PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Monitoring and
                  Controlling, 9, Task 1

          26. a. Use a focus group
                  The key words in the question are "identified experts". Useful ways to
                  obtain information from experts are individual consultations, which
                  include one-on-one meetings and interviews, or through a panel
                  approach, such as focus groups and surveys. Focus groups are an excel-
                  lent way to obtain insight into attitudes, useful to Control Stakeholder
                  Engagement. [Monitoring and Controlling]
                  PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 412
                  PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Monitoring and
                  Controlling, 9, Task 1

          27. d. Organizational culture
                  Enterprise environmental factors are inputs to Plan Stakeholder
                  Management because the management of stakeholders should be
                  adapted to the project environment. This means organizational culture
                  is of particular importance, along with structure and the political cli-
                  mate. These three help determine the best option to support a better
                  and more adaptive approach for managing stakeholders. [Planning]
                  PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 401
                  PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Planning, 6, Task 13
                                                   Project Stakeholder Management       295


28. c. Creates and maintains relationships between the project team and
       stakeholders
        Plan Stakeholder Management identifies how the project will affect
        stakeholders, which then allows the project manager to determine how
        best to involve stakeholders in the project, manage their expectations,
        and achieve project objectives. It is about creating and maintaining rela-
        tionships between the project team and stakeholders, with the goal of
        satisfying their respective needs and requirements within the project's
        boundaries. Stakeholder management planning is iterative and occurs
        throughout the project and is reviewed by the project manager. [Planning]
        PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 400
        PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Planning, 6, Task 13

29. c. Lessons learned
        Lessons learned, stakeholder register templates, and stakeholder reg-
        isters from previous projects are examples of organizational process
        assets that can influence the Identify Stakeholders process. The other
        answers are examples of enterprise environmental factors to consider.
        [Initiating]
        PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 395
        PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Initiating, 5, Task 3

30. b. Hold profile analysis meetings
        A profile analysis meeting is a tool and technique in the Identify
        Stakeholders process. Its purpose is to develop a deeper understanding
        of major project stakeholders. The meetings can be used to exchange
        and analyze information about roles, interests, knowledge, and the
        overall position of each stakeholder about the project. [Initiating]
        PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 398
        PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Initiating, 5, Task 3

31. c. Potential influence in the project
        The stakeholder register contains assessment information as a key com-
        ponent. The assessment information includes: major requirements, main
        expectations, potential influence in the project, and the phase in the
        project life cycle with the most interest. The other answers in this ques-
        tion are examples of items to be included in the stakeholder register but
        in the category of identification information. [Initiating]
        PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 398
        PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Initiating, 5, Task 3
296    PMP(R) Exam Practice Test and Study Guide


          32. d. Contains a change management plan and documents how changes will
                 be monitored and controlled
                  Among other key items useful in the project management plan to
                  review while preparing the stakeholder management plan is the change
                  management plan. All projects involve some type of change. Reviewing
                  this plan can help the project manager work with stakeholders who
                  may be resistant to the project to help turn them into ones who are
                  supportive or at least neutral to the resulting changes. Other items to
                  review are the project life cycle and specific processes, methods to
                  describe the work needed to accomplish the project's objectives, ways
                  to best meet human resource management requirements, and the need
                  and techniques for stakeholder communications. [Planning]
                  PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 400
                  PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Planning, 6, Task 13

          33. a. The project manager to prepare the stakeholder management plan
                  The stakeholder engagement assessment matrix shows the stakeholders
                  current engagement in the project, and the project manager and team
                  then can use it to note the desired level of engagement. See Figure 13-7
                  in the PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013 for an example. As a tool and technique in
                  Plan Stakeholder Management, the project manager then uses it to help
                  prepare the stakeholder management plan. [Planning]
                  PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 402-403
                  PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Planning, 6, Task 13

          34. d. Highest in the very early stages as the project is being approved and
                 initiated
                  The stakeholders' ability to influence the project is highest during the
                  initial phases and gets progressively lower as the project progresses.
                  Active management of stakeholders' involvement decreases the risk of
                  the project failing to meet its goals and objectives. The project manager
                  is responsible to engage and manage stakeholders and may call upon
                  the sponsor as needed. Active management of stakeholder involvement
                  decreases the risk of the project not meeting its goals and objectives.
                  [Executing]
                  PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 406
                  PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Executing, 7, Task 7
                                                   Project Stakeholder Management       297


35. c. Sets forth an escalation process
       Among other things, an escalation process is helpful especially if there
       are issues or risks involving communications that the project manager
       wishes to escalate to determine the most appropriate response or to
       share the approach he or she plans to follow. Other useful items from
       the communications management plan include: stakeholder communica-
       tions requirements, information to be communicated, reasons to distrib-
       ute information, and the people responsible to receive the information.
       [Executing]
       PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 406
       PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Executing, 8, Task 7

36. b. Project schedule
       Project documents are an input to Control Stakeholder Engagement.
       They originate from initiating, planning, executing, or controlling pro-
       cesses and include the project schedule, stakeholder register, issue log,
       change log, and project communications. [Monitoring and Controlling]
       PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 411-412
       PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Monitoring and
       Controlling, 9, Task 1

37. d. Update the lessons learned documentation
       This documentation is an example of an organizational process asset to
       update as it includes the root cause analysis of issues faced, the reasons
       certain corrective actions were taken, and other types of lessons learned
       about stakeholder management. These lessons learned are documented
       and distributed so they are part of the historical database for the project
       and the performing organization. Other organizational process assets
       to update are: stakeholder notifications, project reports, project pre-
       sentations, project records, and stakeholder feedback. [Monitoring and
       Controlling]
       PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 415
       PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Monitoring and
       Controlling, 9, Task 1
298    PMP(R) Exam Practice Test and Study Guide


          38. c. Stakeholder management plan
                  The stakeholder management plan identifies the management strategies
                  required to effectively engage stakeholders. It includes, among other
                  things, the identified interrelationships and potential overlap between
                  stakeholders. This information is invaluable especially if some stake-
                  holders are resistant or negative to the project and also in determin-
                  ing the level of frequency of desired interaction and communications
                  requirements. [Planning]
                  PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 403
                  PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Planning, 6, Task 13

          39. b. Historical information
                  Historical information about previous projects, organizational communi-
                  cations requirements, issue management procedures, and change con-
                  trol procedures are examples of organizational process assets that are
                  inputs to the Manage Stakeholder Engagement process. [Executing]
                  PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 407
                  PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Executing, 8, Task 7

          40. c. Tools and techniques used in Control Stakeholder Engagement
                  In Control Stakeholder Engagement, they are examples of distribution
                  formats from information management systems, a tool and technique in
                  this process. Such systems provide a structured tool for the project man-
                  ager to capture, store, and distribute information to stakeholders about
                  project cost, schedule progress, and performance. The project manager
                  can use these systems to consolidate reports from several systems and
                  facilitate report distribution. [Monitoring and Controlling]
                  PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 412
                  PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Monitoring and
                  Controlling, 9, Task 1
An Overview of the Domains

The PMBOK(R) Guide is organized according to the ten knowledge areas, but the
PMP(R) exam is based on the domains or process groups. This section provides
information about these domains and the examination content outline (ECO)
to assist you as you study for the exam. Review Figure A1-2 from the PMBOK(R)
Guide, 2013 to see the interactions beween these process groups.
   The questions on the exam are distributed as follows by process group follow-
ing the PMI(R) PMP(R) Examination Content Outline - June 2015:

   13% relate to Initiating the Project
   24% relate to Planning the Project
   31% relate to Executing the Project
   25% relate to Monitoring and Controlling the Project
   7% relate to Closing the Project



Initiating the Project
This domain or process group involves processes to define a new project or
phase of an existing project by obtaining authorization to start it. Although it
constitutes 13% of the questions on the exam, it involves only two of the 47 pro-
cesses in the PMBOK(R) Guide. Please see the Figure 11-1 in this chapter.
    The key document is the project charter, and you should be familiar with its
contents. It is assumed in the PMBOK(R) Guide that the business case assessment,
approval, and funding are handled externally to the boundaries of the project.
Read sections 1.4.2 on Portfolio Management and 1.4.3 on Projects and Strategic
Planning in the PMBOK(R) Guide for additional information.
    During the Initiating process, the formal authorization to start a project--or
phase if it is a large project--is obtained, the project manager is assigned and
is given the authority and responsibility to apply organizational resources to
the project, and the key internal and external stakeholders--those who will be
involved in, have an influence over, or affected by the project--are identified.



                                                                               299
300    PMP(R) Exam Practice Test and Study Guide




                   Project integration                              Project stakeholder
                     management                                        management



                           4.1                                                13.1
                     Develop project                                        Identify
                         charter                                         stakeholders




                                                   The dashed circular arrow indicates that the process is part of the
                                                   project integration management knowledge area. This knowledge
                                                   area coordinates and unifies the processes from the other
                                                   knowledge areas.


       Figure 11-1 The Initiating Process Group, from Figure A1-4 in the PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013.
       ((c)PMI, 2013. Reprinted with permission.)


           Study the contents of the stakeholder register and the four methods to use to
       classify stakeholders from the Identify Stakeholder process and refer to the list of
       stakeholders considered to be common to most projects in section 2.2.1 in the
       PMBOK(R) Guide; remember that stakeholder identification is ongoing throughout
       the project. Involvement of customers, sponsors, and other stakeholders from the
       beginning creates a shared understanding of the purpose of the project and how
       it fits into the organization's strategic priorities. This early involvement facilitates
       later deliverable acceptance and increases customer and stakeholder satisfaction.
           The ECO contains eight tasks involving Initiating the Project. While many of
       the questions will relate to the development of the project charter, Task 5, other
       tasks concern stakeholders. New to this PMP(R) exam based on this ECO are two
       tasks. The first of these is:

          Task 7 - "Conduct benefit analysis with stakeholders (including sponsor,
          customer, subject matter expert) in order to validate project alignment with
          organizational strategy and expected business value" (PMI(R), 2015, p. 5).

          Benefit analysis is not a concept discussed in depth in the PMBOK(R) Guide;
       however, the benefit of each process is noted. As described in The Standard for
       Program Management, Third Edition, page 165, programs and projects deliver
       benefits, and a benefit is "an outcome of behaviors, products, or services that
       provide utility to the sponsoring organization as well as to its intended beneficia-
       ries." Benefits are delivered by enhancing current capabilities or developing new
       capabilities to support the organization's strategic goals and objectives. These
       benefits may be quantitative, such as return on investment, or qualitative, such as
       enhanced employee morale. A benefits realization plan then is useful to identify
       and define each benefit, determine when it will be realized and how it will be
                                                        An Overview of the Domains       301


sustained, and define key metrics to use to measure the benefits. Refer to section
1.6 in the PMBOK(R) Guide for a discussion on business value.
   The second new task is:

   Task 8 - Inform stakeholder of the approved project charter, in order to
   ensure common understanding of the key deliverables, milestones, and their
   roles and responsibility." (PMI(R), 2015, p. 5).

   This task then links the two process groups and shows the need for continual
stakeholder involvement and participation as appropriate in the project. See
Figure 2-7 in the PMBOK(R) Guide for the relationship between the project and its
stakeholders.



Planning the Project
The Planning Process Group questions cover processes to refine the project's
scope and its objectives and define what must be done to attain the project's
objectives. According to the ECO, they represent 24% of the questions on the
PMP(R) exam; however, they represent 24 processes and are in all 10 of the knowl-
edge areas in the PMBOK(R) Guide, which means there is a wealth of information
to use to derive these questions. It also means you have a lot to study. Refer to
Figure 11-2 in this chapter.
    Although these processes culminate with the project management plan, you
need to know what happens in the various knowledge areas and have a general
understanding of the contents of the subsidiary plans. A number of concepts are
in these various process groups, with numerous tools and techniques to create
the plans and other outputs of each process. Also, the plans and other docu-
ments that are created are considered by PMI to be "living documents," meaning
that as one plan is prepared, its preparation may result in the need to update
other plans. The plans tend to be what is called by PMI(R) as progressively elabo-
rated, meaning they are refined over time. Planning and documentation then are
iterative and ongoing activities.
    While it can be easy to create these plans, the importance of stakeholder
involvement and buy-in cannot be overlooked, and the project manager and
his or her team need to encourage stakeholder participation. To see the level of
interaction of the Planning Process Group with the other process groups in a typ-
ical project, refer to Figure 3-2 in the PMBOK(R) Guide. It provides the Executing
Process Group with the project management plan and other documents. It is
necessary for overall project success to engage stakeholders continually to set the
stage for achieving the project's objective.
    Consider an area such as risks. While high-level risks are in the project char-
ter, some risks may affect a project immediately, while in another project, time
is required before risks have a significant impact. As another example, during
302    PMP(R) Exam Practice Test and Study Guide



                        Project scope                                       Project time                               Project cost
                        management                                          management                                 management

                                 5.1                              6.1                         6.2                           7.1
                             plan scope                     plan schedule                   define                       plan cost
                            management                      management                     activities                   management


                                 5.2                              6.3                         6.4                            7.2
                               collect                         sequence                estimate activity
                                                                                                                          estimate
                            requirements                       activities                  resources
                                                                                                                            costs


                                5.3                                6.5                        6.6
                                                            estimate activity               develop                         7.3
                               define
                                                                durations                  schedule                      determine
                               scope
                                                                                                                          budget



                                5.4
                            create WBS                                                                                Project quality
                                                                                                                       management
                                                                       Project integration
                                                                                                                            8.1
                                                                         management
                                                                                                                        plan quality
                     Project procurement                                                                                management
                                                                             4.2 develop
                         management
                                                                               project
                                12.1                                         management
                                plan                                             plan
                            procurement                                                                               Project human
                            management                                                                            resource management

                                                                                                                            9.1
                                                                                                                       plan human
                             Project risk                                                                                resource
                             management                                                                                management

                                                11.3
                  11.1                        perform
                plan risk                    qualitative                    Project communications
               management                   risk analysis                        management

                                                                                     10.1
                                                                                                              Project stakeholder
                                                11.4                                 plan
                   11.2                                                         communications
                                                                                                                 management
                                              perform
                 identify                                                         management
                                            quantitative
                   risks                                                                                          13.2 plan
                                            risk analysis
                                                                                                                 stakeholder
                                                                                                                 management
                                  11.5
                                plan risk
                               responses                              The dashed circular arrow indicates that the process is part of the project
                                                                      integration management knowledge area. This knowledge area coordinates
                                                                      and unifies the processes from the other knowledge areas.


         Figure 11-2 The Planning Process Group, from Figure A1-7 in the PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013.
         ((c)PMI, 2013. Reprinted with permission.)

         this process, it may be noted that cost and schedule objectives may be overly
         aggressive. These examples show the magnitude of items to study in this process
         group.
            The ECO has 13 tasks in this domain. Task 1 focuses on establishing detailed
         project deliverables. Tasks 2 through 10 and Task 13 involve the key plans
         that are prepared. In Task 11, the project management plan is presented to
                                                         An Overview of the Domains       303


stakeholders for approval to proceed to executing. Review Section 2.2.2 in the
PMBOK(R) Guide for more information on project governance.
   Task 12 involves the kickoff meeting. It has been covered in previous editions
of the PMBOK(R) Guide and is a best practice to follow, but it is not covered in the
current edition. Therefore, take a look at our reference list. A test question may
be on the kickoff meeting so you can recognize its importance regardless if your
team is virtual or colocated and regardless if your team members have worked
together previously.
   Task 13 in this new ECO involves the stakeholder management plan, so you
should study how to best prepare it and know its contents. It relates to Task 11.
Remember, stakeholder involvement is essential for project success.


Executing the Project
In the Executing Process Group, the majority of the work is done on the
project, and it involves 31% of the questions on the examination, as noted
by the ECO. Eight of the processes and six of the knowledge areas are cov-
ered. These processes are ones required to complete the work described in
the project management plan, which means it emphasizes coordinating with
people and other resources, as well as managing stakeholder expectations.
See Figure 11-3 in this chapter.
    The key process in the figure is Direct and Manage Project Work. Typical cost
and staffing levels are shown in Figure 2-8 in the PMBOK(R) Guide, and it is easy
to see why this process is so important.
    However, for success in all of these processes, as well as all of the other
processes, interpersonal skills of the project manager cannot be underestimated.
Review section 1.7 in the PMBOK(R) Guide along with Appendix X3 on interper-
sonal skills and expect questions on how these skills are best used in different
areas. They are especially important here. Three of the Project Human Resource
Management processes, one process in Project Communications Management,
and one process in Project Stakeholder Management are included in this domain.
    The ECO has seven tasks involving Executing the Project. Task 1 involves
following the human resource management plan, which leads to the other three
human resource management processes in this knowledge area that involve the
project team. It also involves following the procurement management plan. The
exam could include questions from the Conduct Procurement process given the
work done by sellers and the increased use of outsourcing on projects. Task 2
focuses on the project management plan but also mentions leading and develop-
ing the project team
    The Perform Quality Assurance process is in Executing, and it is the focus
on Task 3. Recognize the importance of inspections and audits and the various
tools and techniques to use. The exam could include questions from Conduct
Procurements because high quality work from sellers is essential.
304    PMP(R) Exam Practice Test and Study Guide



                                                                                                   Project human
                                                                                                resource management

                                                     Project stakeholder                                 9.2
                                                        management                                    acquire
                                                                                                    project team
                                                            13.3
                                                          manage
                                                        stakeholder
                                                        engagement                                       9.3
                                                                                                      develop
            Project quality                                                                         project team
             management

                  8.2
                                                                                                         9.4
            perform quality
                                                                                                      manage
               assurance
                                                                                                    project team
                                                     Project integration
                                                       management

                                                             4.3
                                                         direct and
                                                          manage
                                                        project work
                                                                                           Project communications
                                                                                                management


                   Project procurement                                                            10.2
                       management                                                                manage
                                                                                              communications
                            12.2
                          conduct
                       procurements


                     The dashed circular arrow indicates that the process is part of the project integration management knowledge area.
                     This knowledge area coordinates and unifies the processes from the other knowledge areas.


       Figure 11-3 The Executing Process Group, from Figure A1-32 in the PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013.
       ((c)PMI, 2013. Reprinted with permission.)


          As projects represent change, changes occur throughout the project, regardless
       of the life cycle used. Refer to Section 2.4 in the PMBOK(R) Guide for a discussion
       on the project phases and life cycles. Be aware of the need in the executing pro-
       cess to implement those change requests that have been approved officially, as
       stated in Task 4. This task supports Task 5, which notes risks may have impacts
       that can be negative or positive.
          New are the following tasks:

          Task 6 - "Manage the flow of information by following the communications
          plan in order to keep stakeholders engaged an informed" (PMI(R), 2015, p. 8)
          Task 7 - "Maintain stakeholder relationships by following the stakeholder
          management plan, in order to receive continued support and manage expec-
          tations" (PMI(R), 2015, p. 8).

         Both tasks build on the plans in their knowledge areas, but Task 6 focuses
       on the Manage Communications process. It involves more than just distributing
                                                        An Overview of the Domains       305


information because it seeks to ensure stakeholders receive the information they
need and understood it. Techniques to do so are on pages 300 and 301 of the
PMBOK(R) Guide. Of importance is this process's benefit that enables an effective
and efficient communications flow between stakeholders.
   Task 7 moves to the Manage Stakeholder Engagement process and focuses on
ensuring stakeholders are engaged at the right times in the project, managing
expectations through negotiation and communications skills, anticipating future
problems by addressing concerns that are not yet issues, and clarifying and
resolving issues that have been identified. The benefit is for the project manager
to increase support and minimize resistance from stakeholders, which in turn
leads to a greater likelihood of project success.


Monitoring and Controlling the Project
The monitoring and controlling processes are not done in sequence after
Executing, but rather they are performed from the time the project begins as
shown in Figure 3-2 in the PMBOK(R) Guide. This continuous monitoring and
controlling across the project's life cycle coordinates the various project phases.
Corrective and preventive actions and other techniques bring the project into
conformance with the project management plan. It requires tradeoffs between
processes at times. Monitoring and controlling represent 25% of the questions on
the PMP(R) exam. See Figure 11-4 in this chapter, which has 11 processes in eight
knowledge areas. At the center are the Monitor and Control Project Work and
Perform Integrated Change Control processes.
    While monitoring and controlling implies compliance, the processes try to
take a proactive approach to influencing changes that could occur and to address
them as quickly as possible following agreed-upon change and configuration
management procedures, which ensure only approved changes are implemented.
It often leads to the need to update the various plans and other documents.
    There are seven tasks in the ECO relating to monitoring and controlling. Task
1 focuses on overall monitoring of project performance by identifying variances
and taking corrective actions. Therefore, this task highlights the importance of
knowing the various earned value management formulas and why each one is
important, as well as the purpose of other types of analysis such as variance and
trend analyses.
    Task 2 focuses on managing changes. It involves a change management plan,
which is not described per se in the PMBOK(R) Guide; however, the PMBOK(R)
Guide describes the change management process and the configuration pro-
cesses. As you study, note how they differ and complement one another and
what happens in each one.
    Task 3 emphasizes quality, meaning you should study the Control Quality
process and its tools and techniques. You also should note the differences and
similarities between this process and the Validate Scope process.
306    PMP(R) Exam Practice Test and Study Guide



             Project scope                                Project time
             management                                   management

                   5.5                                          6.7
                 validate                                     control
                  scope                                      schedule                                 Project cost
                                                                                                      management


                   5.6                                                                                      7.4
                 control                                                                                  control
                  scope                                                                                    costs
                                                       Project integration
                                                         management

                                                                4.4
                                                           monitor and
            Project stakeholder                              control                                  Project quality
               management                                  project work                                management

                   13.4
                                                                                                            8.3
                 control
                                                                4.5                                       control
               stakeholder
                                                             perform                                      quality
               engagement
                                                            integrated
                                                          change control



                  Project procurement                                                     Project communications
                      management                                                               management

                           12.3                                                                    10.35
                          control                          Project risk                           control
                       procurements                        management                          communications


                                                                11.6
                                                            control risks



                   The dashed circular arrow indicates that the process is part of the project integration management knowledge
                   area. This knowledge area coordinates and unifies the processes from the other knowledge areas.


       Figure 11-4 The Monitoring and Controlling Process Group, from Figure A1-41 in the
       PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013. ((c)PMI, 2013. Reprinted with permission.)


          Task 4 is about monitoring and controlling risks, which means you should
       know when to use different tools and techniques in this process. The goal is to
       be proactive and not enable risks to occur without response plans in place. This
       leads to Task 5, reviewing the issue log. The issue log is covered briefly in the
       PMBOK(R) Guide. Maintaining such a log is a best practice, and risks that material-
       ize and other concerns comprise this log. Further it is a document to update, as
       noted in the Control Communications process.
          Tasks 6 and 7 are new and are as follows:

          Task 6 - "Capture, analyze and manage lessons learned using lessons
          learned management techniques in order to enable continuous improve-
          ment" (PMI(R), 2015, p. 9). This task shows how monitoring and controlling
                                                           An Overview of the Domains        307


   processes permeate the life cycle. Before a project ends, lessons learned are
   collected during the project so they can be used by the project team, as well
   as by other projects in the organization. They are often part of organiza-
   tional process assets to update in many of the process groups.
   Task 7 - "Monitor procurement activities according to the procurement plan,
   in order to verify compliance with project objectives" (PMI(R), 2015, p. 9). This
   task reflects the increased outsourcing of all types of project resource and to
   meet the needs of projects, as well as satisfying both internal and external
   stakeholders, especially the sponsor and the customer. Review the Control
   Procurements process to familiarize yourself with its various tools and tech-
   niques. Note as well how it interacts with other processes as described on
   page 381 in the PMBOK(R) Guide.


Closing the Project
Although closing the project represents only seven percent of the test questions
on the PMP(R) exam, and has only two processes from two knowledge areas, its
importance cannot be overlooked. When the process is complete, the project or a
phase is closed, and it indicates that all the 47 defined processes in the PMBOK(R)
Guide are complete. It also addresses any premature closure and why it occurred.
    In the ECO, it has seven tasks, and there are no new tasks in this June 2015
update.
    Task 1 involves obtaining final acceptance from stakeholders that the scope
and the deliverables of the project were achieved. This task notes the importance
of early and ongoing engagement of stakeholders throughout the project.
    Task 2 emphasizes transferring ownership of the deliverables to stakeholders (e.g.,
an operations group, a functional group, a customer, and end users). An orderly tran-
sition and stakeholder involvement is needed. These stakeholders must have early
involvement, recognize their roles and responsibilities, and the need for them to
be prepared to receive the product, service, or result and sustain its benefits.
    Task 3 involves financial, legal, and administrative closure. Review the steps
involved in administrative closure from the Close Project or Phase process. It also
emphasizes communications to stakeholders about formal project closure.
    Task 4 involves preparing and sharing the final project report. This report
should be noted in the communications management plan and describes project
successes and areas for improvement. Task 5 continues emphasizing collecting
the project's lessons learned and conducting a comprehensive project review.
This is the time when the project's lessons learned are reviewed to see if all
should be retained or if some are no longer valuable. The final review includes
the key project stakeholders to further discuss the project and add to the lessons
learned. This leads to Task 6, which involves archiving the project's documents
and materials. This task is significant for future projects, which should have easy
access to the lessons learned and be able to tailor them.
308  PMP(R) Exam Practice Test and Study Guide




                         Project integration                          Project procurement
                           management                                     management



                               4.6                                            12.4
                          close project                                       close
                            or phase                                      procurements




                                                      The dashed circular arrow indicates that the process is
                                                      part of the project integration management knowledge
                                                      area. This knowledge area coordinates and unifies the
                                                      processes from the other knowledge areas.


        Figure 11-5 The Closing Process Group, from Figure A1-53 in the PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013.
        ((c)PMI, 2013. Reprinted with permission.)

            Task 8 involves feedback from stakeholders. This task may be performed by
        someone external to the project and may involve interviews or surveys. The goal
        is to show stakeholders the importance of their involvement on the project and to
        actively listen to learn what could be improved in the future. It follows informa-
        tion from the stakeholder management plan. Refer to Figure 11-5.
Practice Test

This practice test is designed to simulate PMI(R)'s 200-question PMP(R) certifica-
tion exam. It is our recommendation that you first try this test online to see your
areas of strength and areas for improvement. Then, take the test which follows so
you can see the rationale for the right answer. You can take both versions of this
test as often as you wish to do so.
   INSTRUCTIONS: Note the most suitable answer for each multiple-choice ques-
tion in the appropriate space on the answer sheet.




                                                                               309
310    PMP(R) Exam Practice Test and Study Guide


         1. You recently took over a relatively new project expected to last another
            seven years. The previous project manager completed some of the WBS.
            When you begin to define the project activities, you realize that the WBS
            work packages expected to occur in the next year are planned in detail,
            but the work packages for later in the future (three years or more) are not
            planned with much detail, if any detail at all. You determine--
           a. It is a major problem. The WBS is incomplete and you need to redefine
              the project scope to complete the project schedule.
           b. It is a problem that must be resolved quickly. The previous project man-
              ager was not done with the WBS, and you must stop the project to com-
              plete the WBS in sufficient detail.
           c. It is not a problem at this time. The previous project manager was using
              the rolling wave planning technique, so you are able to continue defining
              the activities.
           d. It is not a problem at this time. You can only plan what you know. You
              plan to communicate to the project sponsor that the WBS is not suffi-
              cient to plan the whole project and that the sponsor can worry about the
              details.

         2. You are managing a project to transform your organization into one that is
            more customer centric as your executives realize they no longer can assume
            existing customers will stay with your firm given offerings by the compe-
            tition. You and your team identified over 300 stakeholders and classified
            them. You realize 45 are influential but negative to the project. You then pre-
            pared your stakeholder management plan. Now, you find you are addressing
            concerns from these stakeholders plus others, and it consumes most of your
            time. However, it is important because--
           a.   They have concerns over priorities and procedures
           b.   These concerns may become issues
           c.   You need committed stakeholders to ensure your project continues
           d.   You realize your project has the greatest chance for success if it operates
                in a projectized environment, and stakeholder support is paramount

         3. On your project to construct a new runway for your City's airport, you are
            in the process of selecting vendors for various parts of this project. You
            have conducted your make-or-buy analysis and have issued Requests for
            Proposals. You believe it is important to examine the readiness of the ven-
            dor to provide the desired end state. This means you are using--
           a.   Proposal evaluation techniques
           b.   Multi-disciplinary review teams
           c.   Analytical techniques
           d.   Independent estimates
                                                                   Practice Test      311


4. Requirements typically are classified into product requirements and project
   requirements. Capturing and managing both types of requirements is impor-
   tant for project success, so you and your team decided to follow this clas-
   sification system on your project to modernize all the telecommunications
   equipment in your company. During such an approach, all the following are
   examples of solution requirements EXCEPT--
  a.   Action requirements
  b.   Level of service requirements
  c.   Security requirements
  d.   Performance requirements

5. Change control procedures, configuration management knowledge base, ver-
   sions, and baselines in the Develop Project Management Plan process are:
  a. Enterprise environmental factors
  b. Organizational process assets
  c. Part of the project's configuration management plan, which as a subsid-
     iary plan will be part of the project management plan
  d. Part of the organization's management practices

6. You are managing a project that has five subcontractors. You must monitor
   contract performance, make payments, and manage provider interfaces. One
   subcontractor submitted a change request to expand the scope of its work.
   You decided to award a contract modification based on a review of this
   request. All these activities are part of--
  a.   Control Procurements
  b.   Conduct Procurements
  c.   Form Contract
  d.   Configuration Management

7. Your project management plan has been approved, and since your company
   follows a stage-gate approach, you are now in the executing phase. You
   have collected a lot of data, and these data are viewed as--
  a. Ones set forth in the PMIS
  b. The lowest level of detail to derive information
  c. Ones recommended through a survey of your stakeholders to assess their
     key communications requirements
  d. A major part of the project management plan

8. The performance measurement baseline consists of all the following EXCEPT--
   a. Scope baseline
   b. Requirements baseline
   c. Schedule baseline
   d. Cost baseline
312    PMP(R) Exam Practice Test and Study Guide


         9. While working as the project manager on a new project to improve over-
            all ease of use in the development of a railroad switching station, you have
            decided to add a subject matter expert who specializes in ergonomics to your
            team. She has decided to observe the existing approach as you and your team
            work to define requirements for the new system. This method is also called--
           a.   Mentoring
           b.   Coaching
           c.   Job shadowing
           d.   User experimentation

        10. In addition to providing support to the project, quality assurance also pro-
            vides an umbrella for--
           a.   Plan-do-check-act
           b.   Improvement of quality processes
           c.   Project management maturity
           d.   Work performance information

        11. As you manage the railroad switching station project, you are concerned that
            the business analyst who was responsible for preparing the WBS may have
            overlooked some parts of the project. In order to see if the WBS requires
            enhancements you decide to--
           a.   Perform a cause-and-effect diagram
           b.   Meet with your sponsor
           c.   Use an affinity diagram
           d.   Review the accompanying WBS Dictionary with a member of the PMO

        12. Assume that you are managing a project in which 80% has been outsourced
            to various sellers. In terms of contract administration, a key aspect is
           a. Having a contract administrator assigned to your core team and reports
              to you
           b. Ensuring there are few, if any, claims
           c. Considering the sellers as members of the project team
           d. Managing the interfaces among the sellers

        13. If you apply the configuration management system along with change con-
            trol processes project wide, you will achieve all but one of the which follow-
            ing objectives?
           a. Provide the basis for which the product configuration is defining
           b. List the approved configuration identification
           c. Document the specific responsibilities of each stakeholder in the Perform
              Integrated Change Control process
           d. Ensure the composition of a project's configuration items is correct
                                                                        Practice Test      313


14. You need to outsource the testing function of your project. Your subcon-
    tracts department informed you that the following document must be pre-
    pared before conducting the procurement:
   a.   Make-or-buy analysis
   b.   Procurement management plan
   c.   Evaluation methodology
   d.   Contract terms and conditions

15. Constraints common to projects include--
   a.   Scope, quality, schedule, budget, and risk
   b.   Scope, teaming, planning, and resources
   c.   Scope
   d.   Resources and communication

16. You are developing a project charter, and it requires first that a business case
    be prepared to make a decision to go ahead with a project Your project is to
    lessen the environmental impact of a landfill so its business case is created
    primarily as a result of a(n)--
   a.   Sustainability impact
   b.   Customer request
   c.   Social need
   d.   Ecological impact

17. To identify inefficient and ineffective policies, processes, and procedures in
    use on a project, you should conduct--
   a.   An inspection
   b.   A process analysis
   c.   Benchmarking
   d.   A quality audit

18. Your project management office implemented a project management meth-
    odology that emphasizes the importance of integrated change control. It
    states that change requests may include--
   a.   Indirect changes
   b.   Defect repairs
   c.   Informal requests from executives
   d.   Ones that do not impact baselines
314  PMP(R) Exam Practice Test and Study Guide


         19. Since projects involve change, change requests then will be needed. Every
             documented change request must be approved by a responsible person,
             who is--
            a.   The project manager or the sponsor
            b.   A member of the CCB
            c.   Identified in the change management plan
            d.   Identified in the project management plan

         20. A number of tools and techniques are helpful in the Perform Integrated
             Change Control process. If you want to implement an integrated change
             control process, you should use--
            a.   Configuration management software
            b.   A project management information system
            c.   Project status review meetings
            d.   Change control meetings

         21. Having worked previously as a software project manager, you were pleased
             to be appointed as the project manager for a new systems integration project
             designed to replace the existing air traffic control system in your country.
             You found a requirements traceability matrix to be helpful on software proj-
             ects, so you decided to use it on this systems integration project. Using such
             a matrix helps to ensure that each requirement--
            a. Adds quality and supports the organization's quality policy
            b. Adds business value as it links to business and project objectives
            c. Sets forth the level of service, performance, safety, security, and
               compliance
            d. Shows the impact to other organizational areas and to entities outside of
               the performing organization

         22. You are working on a complex project in the medical device field. You have
             about 55 internal stakeholders and a very large number of external stake-
             holders including regulatory and consumer interest groups along with the
             medical profession. You need to be aware of their risk tolerances as they are
             examples in the Direct and Manage Project Work process of--
            a. The need to review the stakeholder management plan early in the
               process
            b. Enterprise environmental factors
            c. Organizational process assets
            d. The importance of classifying stakeholders as to interest and influence
                                                                         Practice Test      315


23. Which of the following is focused on the specification of both the deliver-
    ables and the processes as part of the Perform Integrated Change Control
    process?
   a.   Scope change control system
   b.   Configuration control
   c.   Change control board
   d.   Configuration status audits

24. Which of the following tools is used in process analysis to determine the
    underlying causes of defects?
   a.   Root cause analysis
   b.   Assumptions analysis
   c.   Cost-benefit analysis
   d.   Quality metrics

25. All of the following statements concerning Validate Scope and Control
    Quality are true EXCEPT--
   a. The processes can be performed in parallel
   b. Both processes use inspection as a tool and technique
   c. Validate Scope is concerned with the acceptance of deliverables, and
      Control Quality is concerned with meeting quality requirements for the
      deliverables
   d. Validate Scope typically precedes Control Quality

26. There are a number of activities that must be done to close a project or a
    phase. They are step-by-step methodologies. The first one addresses--
   a. Transitioning the product or service to end users, the customer, or an
      operations group
   b. Measuring the completeness of the project's deliverables against the
      requirements
   c. Making sure all the activities necessary to satisfy exit criteria for a phase
      or the entire project are followed
   d. Holding a lessons learned session with interested stakeholders

27. You are in the process of performing quality assurance on your product and
    find that some requirements are not as complete as they should be, which
    causes rework and adds costs to your overall project. One approach to
    determine your next steps is--
   a.   Determining the cost of quality
   b.   Using a checklist
   c.   Identifying the key issues and any suitable alternatives
   d.   Comparing the cost of rework to the life-cycle costs of the project
316    PMP(R) Exam Practice Test and Study Guide


          28. The project scope baseline should be used in the Identify Risks process
              because it--
             a. Identifies project assumptions
             b. Identifies all work that must be done; therefore, it includes all risks on the
                project
             c. Helps organize all work that must be done on the project
             d. Contains information on risks from prior projects

          29. Although there are various tools and techniques to consider as you collect
              requirements on your project, one approach that supports the concept of
              progressive elaboration is--
             a.   Idea/mind mapping
             b.   Affinity diagrams
             c.   Prototypes
             d.   Joint Application Design(R) sessions

          30. Data from which of the following are used to Perform Quality Assurance?
             a.   Control Quality and Plan Quality Management
             b.   Performance Reporting
             c.   Variance analysis
             d.   Tools from Direct and Manage Project execution

          31. An approach to provide insight into the health of the project and to identify
              any areas that require special attention is to--
             a.   Conduct periodic status reviews
             b.   Prepare regular status and progress reports
             c.   Prepare forecasts of the project's future
             d.   Continuously monitor the project

          32. Although your company's project life cycle does not mandate when a
              project review should be conducted, you believe it is important to review
              performance at the conclusion of each phase. The objective of such a review
              is to--
             a. Determine how many resources are required to complete the project
                according to the project baseline
             b. Adjust the schedule and cost baselines based on past performance
             c. Obtain customer acceptance of project deliverables
             d. Determine whether the project should continue to the next phase
                                                                         Practice Test    317


33. The key management skills required during the adjourning stage of team
    development include all but which one of the following?
   a.   Evaluating
   b.   Reviewing
   c.   Celebrating
   d.   Improving

34. Assume that your actual costs are $1,000; your planned value is $1,200; and
    your earned value is $1,500. Based on these data, what can be determined
    regarding your schedule variance?
   a. At -$300, the physical progress is being accomplished at a slower rate
      than is planned, indicating an unfavorable situation.
   b. At +$300, the situation is favorable, as physical progress is being accom-
      plished ahead of your plan.
   c. At +$500, the situation is favorable, as physical progress is being accom-
      plished at a lower cost than was forecasted.
   d. At -$300, you have a behind-schedule condition, and your critical path
      has slipped.

35. The key to effective cost control is--
   a. Using earned value to forecast project status
   b. Focusing on projected expenditures and actively networking with key
      stakeholders to ensure funds will be available as requested
   c. Informing stakeholders of the project's cost status
   d. Managing the approved cost baseline and any changes to it

36. The CPI on your project is 0.44, which means that you should--
   a. Place emphasis on improving the timeliness of the physical progress
   b. Reassess the life-cycle costs of your product, including the length of the
      life-cycle phase
   c. Place emphasis on improving the productivity by which work was being
      performed
   d. Recognize that your original estimates were fundamentally flawed, and
      your project is in an atypical situation

37. Project deliverables are the outputs that include the product, service, or
    result of the project as well as ancillary results. These ancillary results
    should be in the--
   a.   Requirements management plan
   b.   Scope management plan
   c.   Project scope statement
   d.   Project acceptance criteria
318      PMP(R) Exam Practice Test and Study Guide


         38. Which of the following tools and techniques is used in the Close Project or
             Phase process?
             a.   Project management methodology
             b.   Work performance information
             c.   Expert judgment
             d.   Project management information system

          39. After the project scope statement is complete, it may be necessary to update
              other project documents. All the following are examples of a document that
              may require updates EXCEPT--
             a.   Project charter
             b.   Stakeholder register
             c.   Requirements documentation
             d.   Requirements traceability matrix

          40. Your company, noted for its use of innovative technology in its work, is
              also noted for exceeding its budget. On your project, you have been asked
              by the executive team to keep costs under control. You are focusing your
              attention on--
             a. Informing your stakeholders of approved change requests and their costs
             b. Using earned value and following the 50/50 rule
             c. Focusing on work performance information as you begin your work to
                control your project costs
             d. Involving stakeholders to ensure change requests are decided as quickly
                as possible

          41. While managing a large project in your organization, you realize that your
              project team requires training in contract administration because you will be
              awarding several major subcontracts. After you analyze your project require-
              ments and assess the expertise of your team members, you decide that your
              team will need a one-week class in contract administration. This training
              should--
             a. Commence as scheduled and stated in the staffing management plan
             b. Commence as scheduled and stated as part of the procurement manage-
                ment plan
             c. Be scheduled if necessary after performance assessments are prepared
                and after each team member has had an opportunity to serve in the con-
                tract administrator role
             d. Commence as scheduled and stated in the team development plan
                                                                          Practice Test      319


42. Assume that on your project, you are using earned value management. You
    also are conducting performance reviews. You recognize, though, that an
    important aspect of cost control is determining the cause and variance com-
    pared to the cost baseline. You have found that--
   a. The most frequently analyzed measurements are CPI and SPI
   b. The milestone method is the most accurate way to assess performance
      using earned value
   c. Graphical techniques will enhance how the information is received
   d. The range of acceptable variances will tend to decrease over time

43. Your project sponsor has asked you, "What do we now expect the total job
    to cost?" Given that you are using earned value, you should calculate the--
   a.   To-complete performance index
   b.   Estimate to complete
   c.   Estimate at completion
   d.   Budget at completion

44. One key reason that the Develop Project Charter process is so important is
    that it--
   a.   Documents the boundaries of the project
   b.   States the methods for acceptance of the project's deliverables
   c.   Describes the project's characteristics
   d.   Links the project to the ongoing work of the organization

45. Your company has been awarded a contract for project management con-
    sulting services for a major government agency. You were a member of the
    proposal writing team, are PMP(R) certified, and you are the project manager.
    You are now working to prepare your project management plan, which is to
    be submitted in one week. You decided to use some facilitation techniques
    to help develop your plan. While a number are possible, you selected--
   a.   Meeting management
   b.   Checklist analysis
   c.   SWOT analysis
   d.   Assumptions analysis
320      PMP(R) Exam Practice Test and Study Guide


         46. Assume you had a phase gate meeting with your Governance Board for your
             project to develop the next generation radar system as part of the nation's
             airspace modernization program. At this meeting, the Board approved your
             project management plan. However, as you begin to execute your plan, an
             organizational process asset to consider is--
             a.   Stakeholder risk tolerances
             b.   The organization's culture
             c.   Hiring and firing guidelines
             d.   Process measurement data base

          47. Consider the data in the table below. Assume that your project consists
              only of these three activities. Your estimate at completion is $4,400.00.
              This means you are calculating your EAC by using which of the
              following formulas?


                            Activity   % Complete     PV      EV       AC
                            A              100       2,000   2,000     2,200
                            B               50       1,000    500       700
                            C                0       1,000         0      0


             a. EAC = AC/EV x BAC
             b. EAC = AC/EV x [work completed and in progress] + [actual or revised cost
                of work packages that have not started]
             c. EAC = AC + Bottom-up ETC
             d. EAC = % complete x BAC

         48. Rolling wave planning in the Create WBS process refers to situations in
             which--
             a. Certain deliverables or subprojects will be accomplished far into the
                future
             b. Additional work is added to the project after the scope baseline has been
                established; therefore, additional decomposition is required
             c. Identification codes for the WBS elements cannot be determined until the
                schedule activity list is complete in case revisions are required
             d. Subprojects are developed by external organizations and then become
                part of the WBS for the entire project
                                                                        Practice Test      321


49. The lessons learned documentation is an output from the--
   a.   Identify Stakeholders process
   b.   Develop Project Management Plan process
   c.   Manage Communications process
   d.   Plan Communications Management process

50. Your experience has taught you that inappropriate responses to cost vari-
    ances can produce quality or schedule problems or unacceptable project
    risk. When leading a team meeting to discuss the importance of cost control,
    you note that cost control is concerned with--
   a. Influencing the factors that create change to the a uthorized cost baseline
   b. Developing an approximation of the costs of the resources needed to
      complete the project
   c. Allocating the overall cost estimate to individual work items
   d. Establishing a cost performance baseline

51. You are pleased to be the project manager for a new video conferencing
    system for your global organization. You want it to be one that is easy to
    use and is state of the art. As the project manager, you also are the project
    leader. You realize leadership is critical throughout the phases of the project
    and its key elements are--
   a.   Respect and trust
   b.   Political and cultural awareness
   c.   Negotiation and influencing
   d.   Decision making and conflict management

52. The WBS represents all product and project work, including project manage-
    ment. It is sometimes called the--
   a. Control account level
   b. 100% rule
   c. Integration of scope, cost, and schedule for comparison to the earned
      value
   d. The code of accounts
322      PMP(R) Exam Practice Test and Study Guide


         53. Your company is in the project management training business. In addition,
             the company publishes several exam study aids for the PMP(R) and CAPM(R)
             exam. You have your PMP(R), and you have been appointed as the project
             manager to make sure your company's training materials are updated to be
             aligned with the new PMBOK(R) Guide. You must complete your project in
             six months. You are now in month four. Many of your team members have
             been working on other projects as the company uses matrix management.
             In a performance review meeting today, you informed your Governance
             Board that you did not think you could complete this project in the remain-
             ing two months. You were informed that additional resources were not
             available, but you had to complete your project on time. Your best course of
             action is to--
             a.   Revise your schedule baseline
             b.   Use fast tracking
             c.   Adjust leads and lags now in your schedule
             d.   Use modeling techniques

         54. You are trying to determine whether or not to conduct 100% final system
             tests of 500 ground-based radar units at the factory. The historical radar field
             failure rate is 4%; the cost to test each unit in the factory is $10,000; the cost
             to reassemble each passed unit after the factory test is $2,000; the cost to
             repair and reassemble each failed unit after factory test is $23,000; and the
             cost to repair and reinstall each failed unit in the field is $350,000. Using
             decision tree analysis, what is the expected value if you decide to conduct
             these tests?
             a.   $5.5 million
             b.   $5.96 million
             c.   $6.42 million
             d.   $7 million

          55. Motivation is dynamic and complex. The overall success of the project
              depends on the team's commitment to it, which is directly related to motiva-
              tion. On your project, you want to create an environment to meet project
              objectives, but you want to motivate your team members by providing them
              with what they value the most. An example of a value is--
             a.   Clarifying why you made a certain decision
             b.   Using active and passive listening techniques
             c.   Providing a high quality of information exchange
             d.   Promoting job satisfaction
                                                                           Practice Test      323


56. Each time you meet with your project sponsor, she emphasizes the need for
    cost control. To address her concerns, you should provide--
   a.   Work performance information
   b.   Cost baseline updates
   c.   Resource productivity analyses
   d.   Trend analysis statistics

57. One output of the Control Costs process is cost forecasts, which is when--
   a. Modifications are made to the cost information used to manage the proj-
      ect and are communicated to stakeholders
   b. Trend analyses are performed and communicated to stakeholders
   c. A budget update is required and communicated to all stakeholders
   d. A calculated EAC value or a bottom-up EAC value is documented and
      communicated to stakeholders

58. You work for an electrical utility company and will be managing a project
    to build a new substation that will serve a new industrial park. This project
    was authorized because of a--
   a.   Business need
   b.   Market demand
   c.   Technological advance
   d.   Customer request

59. You are about to close your project. In doing so you are using trend analy-
    sis, which is--
   a.   An analytical technique
   b.   A way to show corrective actions taken on the project
   c.   A method of assessing the usefulness of causal analysis
   d.   An approach that also involves expert judgment

60. At the time the risk register is first prepared, it should contain--
   a.   Root causes of risk
   b.   Risk owner
   c.   List of risks requiring near-term responses
   d.   List of potential responses
324      PMP(R) Exam Practice Test and Study Guide


          61. You are following a collaborative approach as you lead you team and are
              conducting a team performance assessment in addition to individual assess-
              ments. The performance of a successful team is measured in terms of--
             a.   Project commitment
             b.   Technical success
             c.   Enhanced ability to work as a team
             d.   Effective decision making

         62. Your project is considered very risky. You plan to perform numerous what-if
             scenarios on your schedule using simulation software that will define each
             schedule activity and calculate a range of possible durations for each activity.
             The simulation then will use the collected data from each activity to cal-
             culate a distribution curve (or range) for the possible outcomes of the total
             project. Your planned approach is an example of which following technique?
             a.   PERT
             b.   Monte Carlo analysis
             c.   Linear programming
             d.   Concurrent engineering

         63. Project execution must be compared, and deviations must be measured for
             management control according to the--
             a.   Scope baseline
             b.   Performance measurement baseline
             c.   Schedule baseline
             d.   Control system

         64. A number of items may be part of the schedule data for the project. The
             amount of additional detail will vary, but the data should include all the fol-
             lowing items EXCEPT--
             a.   Schedule activities
             b.   Activity attributes
             c.   Identified assumptions
             d.   Resource breakdown structure

          65. Lessons learned are important throughout project management. Assume you
              have documented them as you updated the organizational process assets in
              the Manage Stakeholder Engagement process. An example of one to include
              in this process is--
             a.   Root causes of issues
             b.   Effective conflict management approaches
             c.   Meeting minutes
             d.   Risk log
                                                                        Practice Test      325


66. Which tool or technique is NOT used for Control Schedule control?
   a.   Performance reviews
   b.   Project management software
   c.   Work performance information
   d.   Leads and lags

67. As stakeholders engage with the project, the overall effectiveness of the
    stakeholder management strategy can be evaluated. As the project manager,
    this means you should--
   a.   Revise the stakeholder matrix
   b.   Review the roles of the stakeholders
   c.   Update the project management plan
   d.   Update the stakeholder engagement plan

68. Recording and reporting information regarding when appropriate configura-
    tion information should be provided and regarding the status of proposed
    and approved changes effectively is done through--
   a.   Configuration status accounting
   b.   Configuration verification and audit
   c.   Project management methodology
   d.   A project management information system (PMIS)

69. Decomposition is a technique used to break larger, complex items into
    smaller and more manageable items. Which following statement best
    describes the role d
                        ecomposition plays in creating the WBS?
   a. Final output of creating the    WBS is described in terms of phases of a
      project life cycle.
   b. Final output of creating the    WBS is described in terms of schedule
      activities.
   c. Final output of creating the    WBS is described in terms of verifiable prod-
      ucts, services, or results.
   d. Final output of creating the    WBS is described in terms of the scope of
      the project.

70. The schedule can be presented in a number of formats. Assume your stake-
    holders want to see it as a time-scaled logic diagram. This--
   a.   Is   optimized to show relationships between activities
   b.   Is   a pure logic diagram
   c.   Is   a logic bar chart
   d.   Is   one in which each work package is planned as a set of activities
326      PMP(R) Exam Practice Test and Study Guide


          71. Activity attributes are used to extend the description of the activity and to
              identify its multiple components. In the early stages of the project, an exam-
              ple of an activity a ttribute is--
             a.   Activity codes
             b.   Activity description
             c.   Predecessor and successor activities
             d.   Activity name

         72. You are working on a new project in your city to construct an environmen-
             tally friendly landfill. The existing site is so undesirable that many residents
             have moved to other neighboring cities because of their proximity to it.
             However, even though the project has the support of the public, you need
             to have a number of hearings with the city's government before you are
             authorized to begin work. As you are in the planning phase of the project,
             you are waiting for these hearings to be scheduled and held before you can
             begin site preparation. These hearings are an example of--
             a.   A milestone
             b.   An external dependency
             c.   An item to be scheduled as a fragnet
             d.   A mandatory dependency

          73. You are working on a project and want to know how many activities in the pre-
              vious month were completed with significant variances. You should use a(n)--
             a.   Control chart
             b.   Inspection
             c.   Scatter diagram
             d.   Trend analysis

          74. Your project has a budget of $1.5 million for the first year, $3 million for the
              second year, $2.2 million for the third year, and $800,000 for the fourth year.
              Most of the project budget will be spent during--
             a.   Starting the project
             b.   Organizing and preparing
             c.   Carrying out the work
             d.   Closing the project

          75. If you decide to follow an open subordination approach to resolving con-
              flict, you are using which style of conflict resolution?
             a.   Avoiding
             b.   Accommodating
             c.   Compromising
             d.   Collaborating
                                                                        Practice Test      327


76. Typically, the seller receives formal written notice that the contract has been
    completed by the--
   a. Project manager
   b. Authorized procurement administrator
   c. Member of the project management team responsible for daily contract
      administration
   d. Purchasing department head

77. You are working in the Control Procurements process and your project is
    using five contractors. You need to update a number of organizational pro-
    cess assets. An example is--
   a.   Procurement management plan
   b.   Procurement documentation
   c.   Correspondence
   d.   Warranties

78. You are beginning a new project staffed with a virtual team located across
    five different countries. To help limit conflict and misunderstandings con-
    cerning the justification, objectives, and high-level requirements of the proj-
    ect among your team members and their functional managers, you ask the
    project sponsor to prepare a--
   a. Memo to team members informing them that they work for you now
   b. Project charter
   c. Memo to functional managers informing them that you have authority to
      direct their employees
   d. Human resource management plan

79. To anticipate and help develop approaches to deal with potential quality
    problems on your project, you want to use a variety of root-cause analysis
    techniques including all the following approaches EXCEPT--
   a.   Fishbone diagrams
   b.   Ishikawa diagrams
   c.   System or process flowcharts
   d.   Checklists

80. All of the following are examples of ways to generate options for mutual
    gain during negotiations EXCEPT--
   a.   Separating inventing from deciding
   b.   Options broadening
   c.   Zero-sum game analysis
   d.   Multiplying options by shuttling between the specific and the general
328      PMP(R) Exam Practice Test and Study Guide


          81. Recently, your company introduced a new processing system for its prod-
              ucts. You were the project manager for this system and now have been
              asked to lead a team to implement needed changes to increase efficiency
              and productivity. To help you analyze the process outputs, you and your
              team have decided to use which following technique?
             a.   System flowcharts
             b.   Design of experiments
             c.   Pareto analysis
             d.   Control charts

         82. As the project manager, you are negotiating with functional managers and
             other project managers to staff your project with the required levels of
             expertise. To determine the most appropriate criteria to select your team,
             you decided to use--
             a.   Expert judgment
             b.   A virtual team
             c.   Set clear expectations
             d.   Multi-criteria decision analysis

         83. Based on quality control measurements on your manufacturing project,
             management realizes that immediate corrective action is required to the
             material requirements planning (MRP) system to minimize rework. To imple-
             ment the necessary changes you should follow--
             a.   The organization's quality policy
             b.   The quality management plan
             c.   Established operational definitions and procedures
             d.   A defined integrated change control process

         84. You are the project manager on a project to improve traffic flow in the com-
             pany's parking garage. You decide to use flowcharting to--
             a.   Help anticipate how problems occur
             b.   Show dependencies between tasks
             c.   Show the results of a process
             d.   Forecast future outcomes

          85. Recognizing the importance of people on projects, you are preparing your
              human resource management plan. You decide to take a look at the organi-
              zational process assets so you review--
             a.   Escalation procedures for handling issues
             b.   The organizational culture
             c.   Personnel administration policies
             d.   Existing human resources
                                                                       Practice Test      329


86. Schedule control is one important way to avoid delays. While planning
    and executing schedule recovery, one tool available to you to control the
    schedule is--
   a.   Changing the schedule management plan
   b.   Immediately re-baselining
   c.   Adjusting leads and lags
   d.   Changing all project and resource calendars

87. You have been the project manager for your nuclear submarine project for
    four years. While you did not assume this position until the project manage-
    ment plan had been prepared and approved, you find you spend a signifi-
    cant amount of time collecting data and communicating. You also spend
    time reviewing the impact of project changes and implementing ones that
    have been approved. Often you have had to modify a non-conforming prod-
    uct, which means you are spending time on--
   a.   Corrective actions
   b.   Updating the project's requirements
   c.   Updating the traceability matrix
   d.   Defect repair

88. You were assigned recently as the project manager of a program manage-
    ment office project to implement a new enterprise-wide scheduling system
    for use throughout your company. You identify the need for a project charter
    to provide you with appropriate authority for applying resources, completing
    the project work, and formally initiating the project. Who should issue the
    project charter?
   a.   The project manager--you
   b.   The customer
   c.   The person who formally authorizes the project
   d.   A member of the training and development department as they will own
        the training on the new system

89. In which of the following methods of resolving conflict will the conflict typi-
    cally reappear again in another form?
   a.   Smoothing
   b.   Compromising
   c.   Collaborating
   d.   Confronting
330    PMP(R) Exam Practice Test and Study Guide


       90. Statistical sampling is a method in Control Quality to determine the con-
           formance to requirements for some component or product of a project. Its
           greatest advantage is that it--
           a. Does not require a large expenditure of resources
           b. Is accurate enough with a sampling of less than 1%
           c. Does not require 100% inspection of the components to achieve a satis-
              factory inference of the population
           d. Needs to be conducted only when a problem is discovered with the end
              product or when the customer has some rejects

        91. Your project sponsor wants to know whether process variables are within
            acceptable limits. To answer this question, you should--
           a.   Conduct a process analysis
           b.   Conduct a root cause analysis
           c.   Use a control chart
           d.   Use a run chart

       92. You are preparing your cost estimate for your project in robotics. Already,
           some competitors have learned about this project, and they want to be pos-
           sible purchasers of the project when it is complete. You consider this to be
           an opportunity, which means--
           a.   Your cost estimate's accuracy rate should be from -5% to +10%
           b.   You need to reduce activity costs as much as possible
           c.   Your estimate should include the cost of financing
           d.   You should include indirect costs in your estimate

       93. You are planning a project and want to account for how the project will
           be managed in the future. While building your cost performance data, you
           want to provide guidance for when the project is later executed, because
           you know that different responses are required depending upon the degree
           of variance from the baseline. For example, a variance of 10 percent might
           not require immediate action, whereas a variance of 20 percent will require
           more immediate action and investigation. You decide to include the details
           of how to manage the cost variances as part of which following plan?
           a.   Cost management plan
           b.   Change management plan
           c.   Performance measurement plan
           d.   Variance management plan
                                                                          Practice Test      331


94. Assume that you are managing a project team. Your team is one in which
    its members confront issues rather than people, establish procedures collec-
    tively, and is team oriented. As the project manager, which of the following
    represents your team's stage of development and the approach you should
    use during this time?
   a.   Storming; high directive and supportive approach
   b.   Norming; high directive and low supportive approach
   c.   Norming; high supportive and low directive approach
   d.   Performing; low directive and supportive approach

95. You are finalizing all the contracts and ensuring that they are closed. The
    Close Procurements process involves all the following administrative actions
    EXCEPT--
   a.   The procurement administrator is reassigned
   b.   Finalizing open claims
   c.   Updating the project records to show the final contract results
   d.   Archiving the contracts and contract records for future use

96. You are working on a project and want to identify the cause of problems
    in a process by the shape and width of the distribution of the process vari-
    ables. You should use a--
   a.   Histogram
   b.   Pareto chart
   c.   Scatter diagram
   d.   Trend analysis

97. You are working on a construction project in a city different from your
    headquarters' location. You and your team have not worked in this city, City
    B, previously, and you lack knowledge of the local building codes. You had
    a team member review the codes, and he said they were in far greater detail
    than those in your city, City A. When you asked him how much time he
    would need to spend to gain a complete understanding of these codes, he
    estimated that at least five weeks would be needed. You then decided it
    would be more cost effective to hire a local person from City B who spe-
    cializes in this area. As a result, as you prepare your schedule and estimate
    your resource requirements for this project, you should coordinate this work
    closely with which of the following processes:
   a.   Estimate Costs
   b.   Define Activities
   c.   Determine Budgets
   d.   Develop Schedule
332    PMP(R) Exam Practice Test and Study Guide


       98. Assume that you are managing a project that once completed will take
           you company into new markets. Since it is so significant it has the inter-
           est of executive managers and other key internal stakeholders. You know
           for success, the marketing department will play a key role. You and your
           team identified them as key stakeholders. You met with the Chief Marketing
           Officer, and she indicated she would support the project. However, the Chef
           Marketing Officer has attended only the first status review meeting but none
           of the subsequent meetings. She also has not sent someone from her staff.
           This situation shows the importance of--
           a.   Executive support
           b.   The need to escalate this issue to your sponsor
           c.   Maintaining the stakeholder register
           d.   Engaging stakeholders at certain stages

        99. The nature of project work is such that it inevitably changes. You know this
            is the case on your software project as you were about 50% done when the
            company announced all software work was to be done using agile, even
            work in progress, and your project was using waterfall. You now believe
            it is time to ensure your stakeholders have not changed, and you want to
            reassess them to make sure you do not have new stakeholders or have ones
            whose positions have changed. You decide to--
           a. Personally review the stakeholder register that was prepared when the
              project began
           b. Update the stakeholder engagement plan
           c. Use subject matter experts
           d. Reevaluate your power/interest grid

       100. Assume you are working as the project manager on the first project in your
            company to use the critical chain approach to scheduling. You are a PMP(R)
            and also are certified in critical chain. You are getting ready for a perfor-
            mance review with your Governance Board, and you expect they will ask
            questions about--
           a.   The magnitude of variance against the schedule baseline
           b.   Schedule risk
           c.   Performance to date since the past review meeting
           d.   The buffer needed and buffer remaining
                                                                          Practice Test      333


101. You are in the early stages of a project to manufacture disposable medical
     devices. You need a number of engineers including ones with specialties
     in mechanical, environmental, and systems engineering. In the early stages
     of this project, your resource pool includes a large number of both junior
     and senior engineers in the various specialty areas. However, as the project
     progresses--
    a. Fewer systems engineers will be needed
    b. The resource pool can be limited to those people who are knowledge-
       able about the project
    c. To complete the project on time, you will continue to require access to a
       large number of engineers in their specialty areas
    d. You will only need junior level engineers as the senior level people can
       be used early in the project to mentor and train them

102. A number of approaches can be helpful when estimating resource require-
     ments for activities on a project. Assume you are managing a project and
     you have already prepared your WBS. When you decomposed your WBS, it
     had work packages. You then prepared an activity list. Now, you are prepar-
     ing your schedule and determining your resource requirements. You found
     there were about 30 activities that you could not estimate with a reasonable
     degree of confidence, so you and your team decided to use which one of
     the following approaches to help with these activity resource estimates:
    a.   Resource breakdown structure
    b.   Published estimating data
    c.   Alternatives analysis
    d.   Bottom-up estimating

103. To practice effective schedule control, your project team must be alert to any
     issues that may cause problems in the future. To best accomplish effective
     schedule control, the team should--
    a.   Review work performance information
    b.   Allow no changes to the schedule
    c.   Update the schedule management plan on a continuous basis
    d.   Hold status reviews

104. Obviously as a project manager, you will be making decisions throughout
     the project. A guideline for decision making is--
    a.   Active listening skills to ensure all points of view are heard
    b.   Focus on the vision of the project
    c.   Gather relevant or critical information
    d.   Focus on goals to be served
334    PMP(R) Exam Practice Test and Study Guide


       105. You recognize the importance of the project charter, and it has a number of
            key benefits including--
           a. A direct way for senior management to formally accept and commit to
              the project
           b. A method to enable the project manager to assign resources to the
              project
           c. A way to ensure everyone has a foundational understanding of the
              project
           d. A way to establish internal agreements in the organization to ensure
              proper delivery under the contract

       106. A watch list of low priority risks is documented in the--
           a.   Work performance information
           b.   Risk register
           c.   Fallback plans
           d.   Risk response plan

       107. You are the project manager for a major logistics installation project and
            must obtain specific services from local sources external to your project.
            Your subcontracts administrator has told you to prepare a product or service
            description, which is referenced in a--
           a.   Project statement of work
           b.   Contract scope statement
           c.   Request for proposal
           d.   Contract

       108. Assume you are finally in the Close Project phase after almost two years on
            your project. You are holding a series of meetings, one of which is--
           a.   Team performance assessments
           b.   User groups
           c.   Requirements analysis
           d.   Contractor assessments for the qualified seller list

       109. You are working on a project to upgrade the existing fiber-optic cables in
            your province. You have determined that a resource can install 25 meters
            of cable per hour, so the duration required to install 1,000 meters would be
            40 hours. This means you are using--
           a.   Productivity efficiency factors
           b.   Parametric estimating
           c.   Analogous estimating
           d.   PERT
                                                                        Practice Test      335


110. During the stages of team development, your team is in which stage when
     there is problem solving and interdependence along with achievement and
     synergy?
    a.   Storming
    b.   Forming
    c.   Norming
    d.   Performing

111. When you are about to terminate a contract, the one place to look for spe-
     cific procedures for contract closure is in the--
    a.   Statement of work in the contract
    b.   Terms and conditions in the contract
    c.   Product description
    d.   Organizational process assets

112. Assume even though you are the seller, you have asked the buyer to termi-
     nate your contract for convenience. You and your team believe, based on
     the work done so far, you will not be able to satisfy the buyer. You added
     staff members even though it was a fixed-price contract, but still your deliv-
     erables are being rejected. You and your team are in shock, but the buyer
     agrees. Now, the buyer is working to terminate the contract for convenience.
     As the buyer one should--
    a. Reassign staff
    b. Have the procurement staff handle the termination and the closing
       activities
    c. Suggest an increase in the allocated time to the seller
    d. Involve stakeholders

113. You decided to implement a team-based reward and recognition for your
     project, and the team members agreed on the project's ground rules that
     were established. However, while your sponsor liked the idea, the human
     resources department states individual performance appraisals must be
     done. As the project manager, you do so--
    a. At the time the team member completes work on his or her deliverable
       or activities
    b. When the project is in the closing phase
    c. As specified in the person's Individual Development Plan
    d. In conjunction with the functional manager
336      PMP(R) Exam Practice Test and Study Guide


         114. Your company is embarking on a project to launch a new product deliv-
              ery service. You are the project manager for this project and have just fin-
              ished the concept phase. The various outputs/deliverable(s) for this phase
              include--
             a.   Project management plan
             b.   Scope of work and requirements
             c.   Project charter and stakeholder register
             d.   Roles and responsibilities of the project manager

         115. As you work in the executing process, and especially in the Direct and
              Manage Project Work process, the majority of the project's work is being
              completed. As an output, you know you need to update a number of project
              documents, one of which is the--
             a.   Project baselines
             b.   Issue logs
             c.   Key performance indicators
             d.   Process improvement plan

         116. You are managing a project in which your team members all work in the
              same geographic location and have worked together previously on many
              projects. Everyone is aware of the various strengths and weaknesses of the
              individual team members and their key areas of expertise. As a result--
             a.   A kickoff meeting is recommended
             b.   Team-building activities will not be needed on your project
             c.   You should expect minimal conflicts and changes to occur
             d.   Rewards and recognition will be handled smoothly throughout the
                  project

         117. Team building should be ongoing throughout the project life cycle. However,
              it is hard to maintain momentum and morale, especially on large, complex
              projects that span several years. One guideline to follow to promote team
              building is to--
             a. Consider every meeting a team meeting, not the projectmanager's
                meeting
             b. Conduct team building at specific times during the project through off-
                site meetings
             c. Engage the services of a full-time facilitator before any team-building ini-
                tiatives are conducted
             d. Develop the project schedule using the services of a project control offi-
                cer and then issue it immediately to the team
                                                                        Practice Test      337


118. You have been assigned as the project manager for a major project in your
     company where the customer and key supplier are located in another coun-
     try. You have been working on your project for six months. Recently, you
     traveled to this country, and at the conclusion of a critical design review
     meeting, which was highly successful, you realized you were successful in
     building a high-performing team. You had your own team members, who
     work in a weak matrix structure, on a conference call during this meeting.
     Although it was difficult to reach agreement on some key issues, you there-
     fore relied on your interpersonal skills in--
    a.   Facilitation
    b.   Negotiating
    c.   Influencing
    d.   Decision making

119. You feel fortunate to be assigned as the project manager on a multi-phase
     project that was requested by your company's key customer. It has the inter-
     est of the senior executives, and it was approved by the organization's port-
     folio oversight group. As you begin to work on this multi-phase project, a
     best practice is to--
    a.   Periodically review the business case
    b.   Establish a Governance Board to conduct the phase reviews
    c.   Use project audits
    d.   Focus on realizing benefits

120. Because risk management is relatively new on projects in your company,
     you decide to examine and document the effectiveness of risk responses in
     dealing with identified risks and their root causes. You therefore--
    a.   Conduct a risk audit
    b.   Hold a risk status meeting
    c.   Ensure that risk is an agenda item at regularly scheduled staff meetings
    d.   Reassess identified risks on a periodic basis

121. Thinking back to lessons that your company learned from experiences with
     its legacy information systems during the Y2K dilemma, you finally con-
     vinced management to consider systems maintenance from the beginning of
     the project. However, maintenance should--
    a. Always be included as an activity to be performed during the closeout
       phase
    b. Have a separate phase in the life cycle for information systems project
       because 60% to 70% of computer systems' life-cycle costs generally are
       devoted to maintenance
    c. Not be viewed as part of the project life cycle
    d. Be viewed as a separate project
338      PMP(R) Exam Practice Test and Study Guide


         122. On your systems development project, you noted during a review that the
              system had less functionality than planned at the critical design review. This
              note suggests that during the Control Risks process you used which follow-
              ing tools and techniques?
             a.   Risk reassessment
             b.   Variance analysis
             c.   Technical performance measurement
             d.   Reserve analysis

         123. The workaround that you used to deal with a risk that occurred should be
              documented and included in which following processes?
             a.   Report Performance
             b.   Validate Scope
             c.   Direct and Manage Project Work
             d.   Control Risks

         124. Contested changes are requested changes when the buyer and seller can-
              not agree on compensation for the change. They are also known as all but
              which one of the following?
             a.   Disputes
             b.   Demands
             c.   Appeals
             d.   Claims

         125. A structured review of the seller's progress to deliver project scope and qual-
              ity within cost and schedule is known as a(n)--
             a.   Procurement performance review
             b.   Procurement audit
             c.   Inspection
             d.   Status review meeting

         126. Within your company's portfolio, your project is ranked in the top five in
              terms of importance of the 60 projects under way; however, the number of
              resources available to you is still limited. You have decided to pilot test the
              use of critical chain on your project. You have calculated your critical path.
              You want to ensure that your target finish date does not slip in the critical
              chain method. To do so you should--
             a.   Add a project buffer
             b.   Put in three feeding buffers
             c.   Determine the drum resource
             d.   Manage the total float of the network paths
                                                                       Practice Test      339


127. Assume you are developing your project charter and decided to review
     enterprise environmental factors. An example is--
    a.   Codes of conduct
    b.   Process definitions
    c.   Information from the risk management activity
    d.   Results of previous project selection decisions

128. A team-building approach that facilitates a sense of community is--
    a.   Matrix management
    b.   Fast-tracking
    c.   Tight matrix
    d.   Task force

129. On your project you decided it would be worthwhile to prepare a stake-
     holder engagement matrix. You felt this matrix would help show gaps
     between the current and the desired engagement levels of your project's
     stakeholders. After you prepared this matrix, you decided to work with your
     team to determine actions and communications required to close the identi-
     fied gaps. You did so by--
    a.   Updating the stakeholder register
    b.   Consulting with experts
    c.   Assigning a team member to work with stakeholders in each category
    d.   Showing identified interrelationships and potential overlaps among the
         stakeholders

130. Historical information is used--
    a.   To   compare current performance with prospective lessons learned
    b.   To   prepare the stakeholder management plan
    c.   To   evaluate the skills and competencies of prospective team members
    d.   As   an input to Develop Project Charter

131. Work completed, key performance indicators, technical performance
     measures, start and finish dates of schedule activities, number of change
     requests, number of defects, actual costs, and actual decisions are examples
     of work performance data output of--
    a.   Project Plan Development
    b.   Risk Control
    c.   Monitor and Control Project Work
    d.   Direct and Manage Project Work
340      PMP(R) Exam Practice Test and Study Guide


         132. Two team members on your current construction project are engaged in a
              major argument concerning the selection of project management software.
              They refuse to listen to each other. The most appropriate conflict resolution
              approach for you to use in this situation is--
             a.   Accommodating
             b.   Compromising
             c.   Collaborating
             d.   Forcing

         133. As you use the critical chain method in lieu of the criticalpath method in
              developing your schedule, assume you have determined the buffer sched-
              ule activities. Your planned activities are scheduled to their latest possible
              planed start and end dates. Therefore, you are focusing on--
             a. Managing the free float of each network path
             b. Managing the total float of the network paths
             c. Managing remaining buffer durations against the remaining durations of
                task chains
             d. Managing the total buffer durations against the d
                                                                 urations of the task
                chains

         134. A key member of your project has deep technical skills and many years
              of experience in the company. However, she felt she should be the project
              manager. When you became the project manager instead, her morale dete-
              riorated. You worked with her to obtain her ideas whenever there were
              issues and commended her work to others. But her morale is so low, and she
              is constantly complaining. Now you notice her morale is so poor that it is
              affecting other team members, and there are numerous negative conflicts you
              need to resolve. You have decided you need to reassign this staff member
              and have worked with your PMO manager to do so. Your next step is to--
             a. Meet with this team member and inform her of your decision
             b. Inform the team she is moving to a new position but recognize her con-
                tributions to them
             c. Issue a change request
             d. Work with human resources and then meet with this team member

         135. You are performing a stakeholder analysis on your project, and you are
              working with your team to ensure you do not omit a key stakeholder. Your
              first step should be to--
             a.   Prepare a stakeholder register
             b.   Determine the model you plan to use to classify the stakeholders
             c.   Assess how certain stakeholders are likely to respond in certain situations
             d.   Identify all potential project stakeholders and their relevant information
                                                                          Practice Test    341


136. Before considering a project closed, what document should be reviewed to
     ensure that project scope has been satisfied?
    a.   Project scope statement
    b.   Project management plan
    c.   Project closeout checklists
    d.   Scope management plan

137. A cost management plan should establish and document the various earned
     value rules of performance measurement. Along with defining the WBS to
     the level that the earned value analysis will be performed and establish-
     ing how earned value will be credited to the project (0-100, 0-50-100, and
     so on), which following rule is also recognized regarding performance
     measurement?
    a. Determine the     formula for calculating the estimate to complete (ETC) for
       the project
    b. Determine the     code of accounts allocation provision for the WBS
    c. Determine the     formula for calculating the estimate at completion (EAC)
       for the project
    d. Determine the     variance thresholds to be used in the project

138. All the following elements are organizational processasset updates, resulting
     from closing a project or phase EXCEPT--
    a.   Project files
    b.   Project or phase closure documents
    c.   Historical information
    d.   Final product, service, or result transition

139. You have a conflict on your team but have enough time to resolve it, and
     you want to maintain future relationships. Thankfully, there is mutual trust,
     respect, and confidence among the parties involved. You decide to use con-
     fronting to resolve this conflict. In using this approach, your first step should
     be to--
    a.   Separate people from the problem
    b.   Identify the causes of the conflict
    c.   Establish ground rules
    d.   Explore alternatives

140. One way to evaluate the project schedule performance is to--
    a.   Use the project management information system (PMIS)
    b.   Determine the percent complete of in-progress schedule activities
    c.   Establish a schedule change control system
    d.   Determine the total float variance
342    PMP(R) Exam Practice Test and Study Guide


       141. Validate Scope works hand-in-hand with Control Quality and generally fol-
            lows Control Quality. A tool and technique used in Validate Scope that is not
            used in Control Quality is--
           a.   Group decision-making techniques
           b.   Inspection
           c.   Statistical sampling
           d.   Variance analysis

       142. Assume your project is considered to be extremely important to your com-
            pany as it is for its top client. You have been given the authority to assign
            resources to the project as you set up your team. An important criterion is--
           a.   Experience
           b.   Ability
           c.   Knowledge
           d.   Skills

       143. You are a goal-oriented project manager who is more interested in work
            accomplishment than relationship building. This indicates that you tend to
            resolve conflicts primarily through the use of--
           a.   Smoothing
           b.   Compromising
           c.   Collaborating
           d.   Forcing

       144. You are working on a long-term project that has a number of benefits to its
            customers and users. Therefore, as the project manager, one of your first
            steps was to identify the stakeholders that were critical to project success.
            Because this project will need long-term support by your organization once
            it is completed, key stakeholders are--
           a.   Operations managers
           b.   Manufacturing managers
           c.   Sellers
           d.   Business partners

       145. Effective communication occurs in groups as well as between individuals
            and is made up of several key components, such as the purpose of the mes-
            sage, the audience that you are delivering the message to, and the content
            of the message itself. One important area to consider when working with
            manage communications--
           a.   The choice of media
           b.   How often to distribute the information
           c.   The communications plan
           d.   The project performance report structure
                                                                       Practice Test      343


146. A conflict resolution approach that is NOT considered to be very effective
     when more than a few players are involved and their viewpoints are mutu-
     ally exclusive is--
    a.   Forcing
    b.   Avoiding
    c.   Compromising
    d.   Collaborating

147. The key output of Identify Stakeholders that documents identification infor-
     mation, assessment information, and classification is the--
    a.   Stakeholder management plan
    b.   Communications plan
    c.   Stakeholder register
    d.   Communications log

148. Improvement to the processes and the product is a goal of project quality
     management. Assume that after completing a quality audit, you have dis-
     covered some gaps/shortcomings in the way that the project team is com-
     pleting one deliverable. As an output to Perform Quality Assurance, you
     would create which of the following item that feeds directly into the Perform
     Integrated Change Control processes?
    a.   Quality management plan updates
    b.   Risk register
    c.   Change requests
    d.   Project document updates

149. The Estimate Costs process uses all the following tools and techniques
     EXCEPT--
    a.   Three-point estimating
    b.   Cost of quality assumptions
    c.   Reserve analysis (contingency reserves)
    d.   Basis of estimates

150. A contract is a type of agreement, typically used when a project is being
     performed for an external customer. Agreements of all types are used as an
     input to--
    a.   Develop Project Charter
    b.   Develop Project Team
    c.   Plan Procurement Management
    d.   Conduct Procurements
344      PMP(R) Exam Practice Test and Study Guide


         151. As you prepare to close your project, which of the following is an input to
              the Close Project or Phase process?
             a.   Work performance information
             b.   Expert judgment
             c.   Accepted deliverables
             d.   Change requests

         152. Managing change to the scope baseline is the main benefit of the process of
              Control Scope. As you work to avoid scope creep on you project, you want
              to focus on determining the cause and degree of difference from this base-
              line and project performance. To do so, you decide to--
             a.   Establish scope guidelines
             b.   Set up and follow a requirements traceability matrix
             c.   Set up scope categories
             d.   Use variance analysis

         153. Assume you have been working with your sponsor to prepare you charter,
              and you plan to present it to your Steering Committee on Friday. You are
              managing a software project, and the business need stated that you should
              use agile for the first time in your company rather than waterfall. In the
              Develop Project Charter process, this is then--
             a.   A tool and technique
             b.   Part of the enterprise environment factors as an input to this process
             c.   A high-level requirement
             d.   Stated in the strategic plan as a tool and technique in this process

         154. Procurement documents are used in the Identify Stakeholder process
              because they--
             a.   Are an enterprise environmental factor and an input to the process
             b.   Are an organizational process asset and an input to the process
             c.   Note key stakeholders as parties in the contract
             d.   Serve as a way to prioritize and classify stakeholders

         155. You completed your stakeholder analysis. How do you want to manage
              those stakeholders that have a high interest in your project and high power
              over decisions affecting your project?
             a.   Manage them closely
             b.   Keep them satisfied
             c.   Keep them informed
             d.   Monitor them occasionally
                                                                          Practice Test      345


156. Change requests include a group of potential changes to a project. Types of
     change requests include all the following EXCEPT--
    a.   Updates
    b.   Maintenance requests
    c.   Corrective actions
    d.   Preventive actions

157. You are working on a project that needs approval from your City Council
     and the courts, because the project is one with significant environmental
     and social impacts. Although many consumer groups are advocates of this
     project, others are opposed to it. Hearings are scheduled to resolve these
     issues and to obtain the needed permits to proceed. In preparing your
     human resource plan, you decide to designate a person as the court liaison,
     which is an example of a--
    a.   Role
    b.   Responsibility
    c.   Required competency
    d.   Ability of the team member to make appropriate decisions

158. Assume you are managing an international project. Your team is located in
     Atlanta, Georgia, US; Berlin, Germany; and Melbourne, Australia. You and
     your sponsor are located in Paris, France, and your customer is located in
     Athens, Greece. Recognizing the different locations of the stakeholders in
     your project in its initial stages, a best practice to follow in terms of working
     toward project success is to--
    a. Determine who decides the project is a success
    b. Aligning the personal inputs of different project participants with a vision
       focused on success
    c. Establishing the project culture during the initiating stage of the project
    d. Identifying basic cultural characteristics and selecting one to follow

159. As a project manager, you recognize the importance of actively engaging
     key project stakeholders on a project. You have prepared an analysis of your
     stakeholders early in your project and classified them according to their
     interest, influence, and involvement in your project. You want to now--
    a. Focus on relationships necessary to ensure success
    b. Assess stakeholder legitimacy
    c. Determine the urgency that each stakeholder requires when he or she
       requests information about the project
    d. Focus on each stakeholder's power relevant to the project
346  PMP(R) Exam Practice Test and Study Guide


        160. As you prepare your human resource management plan for your project, you
             have decided to document the roles and responsibilities of your eight team
             members. You have looked at some formats to use and find most are in the
             form of an organization chart, the responsibility chart or matrix, or a role
             description in text format. However, regardless of the format, the emphasis
             is to--
            a. List resources based on category
            b. Track project costs and align them with the organization's accounting
               system
            c. Have an unambiguous owner for each work package
            d. Enable an operational department to easily see all of its portion of the
               project's resources

        161. The Plan Quality Management process includes all the following techniques
             EXCEPT--
            a.   Benchmarking
            b.   Design of experiments
            c.   Process analysis
            d.   Control charts

        162. You are managing a major international project that involves multiple
             performing organizations. To establish the guiding rules for the project
             regarding quality, you and your project team must develop a--
            a.   Improvement management plan
            b.   Configuration management plan
            c.   Quality policy
            d.   List of quality metrics for the project

        163. You are working on a project that management has decided to terminate
             early, because the product was rendered obsolete by the introduction of new
             technology by a competitor. You have awarded a contract for part of the
             project that will be terminated, and fortunately have a clause that enables
             you to terminate it for convenience at any time. This means that--
            a. Your contractual obligations are complete once you issue the termination
               for convenience
            b. You may need to compensate the seller for seller preparations and for
               any completed or accepted work
            c. You need to compensate the seller only for accepted work that was com-
               pleted prior to the termination order
            d. Specific rights and responsibilities are determined once the termination
               order is issued
                                                                         Practice Test      347


164. Of the following, which one is NOT true concerning an agreement?
    a. It is a legal relationship subject to remedy in the courts.
    b. It can take the form of a complex document or a simple purchase order.
    c. It is a mutually binding legal relationship that obligates the seller to pro-
       vide specific products, services, or results and obligates the buyer to pay
       the seller.
    d. It includes a specific contract management plan.

165. All of the following can be used in lieu of the term "bidders conferences"
     EXCEPT--
    a.   Contractor conferences
    b.   Pre-bid conferences
    c.   Vendor conferences
    d.   Project review meetings

166. Assume you are preparing your procurement management plan. A useful
     tool and technique is to--
    a.   Have a meeting
    b.   Use your risk register
    c.   Review the requirements document
    d.   Use your stakeholder register

167. Your role in the project includes helping to resolve problems; making rec-
     ommendations regarding priorities; accelerating activities to meet the tar-
     get schedule; promoting communications among project team members;
     and helping management monitor the project's progress on a regular basis.
     Most of the people working on your project are scientists or technical
     experts. You are working in which of the following types of organizational
     structures?
    a.   Task force
    b.   Balanced matrix
    c.   Project expeditor
    d.   Project coordinator
348    PMP(R) Exam Practice Test and Study Guide


         168. Assume you are working on a complex project in your organization, and it
              involves in-house staff, as well as contractors. Some of your team members
              work in different locations. At first, the team members did not really under-
              stand their roles and responsibilities and were not that committed to the
              project. To avoid cost and schedule overruns, you learned you needed to
              have a lot of meetings with your team to obtain their buy-in and use more
              of a command and control leadership approach. Now, however, a year has
              passed, and the project is on schedule and within budget. There is greater
              trust among the team members. You have learned since this team is more
              mature that you--
             a.   Can use an adaptive project life cycle
             b.   Should focus on networking and professional development
             c.   Can use a flexible leadership style
             d.   Can promote interface relationship management

         169. While you have worked as a project manager for ten years, you are new to
              your current organization. In the past, your organization was informal in
              terms of plans to prepare and processes to follow. Your new organization,
              however, requires that each project have a human resource management
              plan. You are unsure of the reporting relationships that need to be followed.
              You decide to--
             a.   Hold meetings with the team members who have been assigned thus far
             b.   Use experts
             c.   Develop a RACI chart and review it with your sponsor
             d.   Use your WBS and develop a hierarchical organization chart

         170. An intentional activity to ensure future performance of project work is
              aligned with the project management plan is--
             a.   Preventive action
             b.   Corrective action
             c.   Implemented change requests
             d.   Work performance information

         171. Close procurements is a process that involves includes activities for adminis-
              trative closure such as--
             a.   Customer acceptance and final payment
             b.   Auditing project success or failure and archiving records
             c.   Final contractor payment and lessons learned
             d.   Transition of the final product and acceptance of deliverables
                                                                           Practice Test      349


172. As a project manager, not only must you be a leader, but you also must have
     outstanding skills in communicating because research over the years shows
     project managers spend about 90% of their time communicating. You are
     working to create, collect, distribute, store, retrieve, and ultimately dispose of
     project information as described in your communications management plan.
     The benefit of this work is--
    a. An effective and efficient flow of communications among stakeholders
    b. Creating an environment with an emphasis on transparent communica-
       tions with your stakeholders
    c. Having resources available to ensure your stakeholders have access to
       needed information in a timely way
    d. Ensuring communications management policies, operating procedures,
       and processes are followed

173. Assume you are managing a project, and your project management plan has
     been approved. Your project has a high level of change associated with it.
     There is active and ongoing stakeholder involvement. This means you prob-
     ably are working with a(n)--
    a.   Adaptive life cycle
    b.   Iterative life cycle
    c.   Incremental life cycle
    d.   Predictive life cycle

174. One way to help mitigate personnel risks that may occur during the project
     is to--
    a. Meet individually with each team member
    b. Provide specific recognition to each team member who has worked on
       the project
    c. Prepare a staff release plan
    d. Document the time each person is to work on the project in a resource
       calendar

175. You are conducting a stakeholder analysis on your project. After identifying
     potential stakeholders, the next step in the process is to--
    a. Determine their desired level of participation
    b. Provide detailed contact information for each identified stakeholder
    c. Perform an assessment to see how each stakeholder might react in cer-
       tain situations
    d. Analyze each stakeholder's impact or support and classifythem
350    PMP(R) Exam Practice Test and Study Guide


       176. Assume your project communication management plan has been approved
            by your sponsor and the members of your Steering Committee. You are
            managing a global project and have team members working virtually in four
            continents and stakeholders in numerous locations. Your next step is to--
           a.   Set up an information management system
           b.   Select communications technology
           c.   Determine performance reporting methods
           d.   Select a communications model

       177. Although your project team is working virtually, you are striving to make it
            a high-performing team. You held a virtual kickoff meeting to ensure there
            was a shared project vision. You now see that team members are addressing
            the work to be done, but they do not seem to be collaborating. You realize
            the team is--
           a.   Concerned about their formal roles and responsibilities
           b.   Independent
           c.   Forming
           d.   Storming

       178. You are conducting a stakeholder analysis on your project. Your organization
            uses an approach to classify stakeholders based on their level of authority
            and their active involvement in the project. This approach is known as--
           a.   A power/interest grid
           b.   A power/influence grid
           c.   An influence/impact grid
           d.   A salience model

       179. When managing projects, one important technique is capturing lessons
            learned from previous projects to improve the organization's project manage-
            ment process. Therefore, assume you are working to identify possible risks
            to your project, and there are numerous techniques to use but you should
            consider--
           a.   Expert judgment
           b.   Checklists
           c.   Influence diagrams
           d.   Interviews
                                                                         Practice Test      351


180. Failure to meet quality requirements can have serious, negative effect for a
     project and its stakeholders. Therefore, you are focusing on quality assur-
     ance as an ongoing activity in your projects. It helps ensure appropriate
     standards and operational definitions are used, which means--
    a. A focus on Six-Sigma, failure mode and effect analysis, and total quality
       management
    b. An emphasis on the International Organization for Standardization
    c. Using methods, such as those recommended by Deming, Juran, and Crosby
    d. Focusing on inspection over prevention

181. During a bidders conference, it is important that--
    a.   Only qualified sellers participate
    b.   All potential sellers are given equal standing
    c.   The evaluation criteria for the proposal is used to determine participation
    d.   Responses to questions be provided solely to the p  rospective seller that
         asked the question

182. One key interpersonal skill used to Manage Stakeholder Expectations is--
    a.   Negotiation skills
    b.   Building trust
    c.   Compromise
    d.   Conversation

183. You are a project manager leading the construction project of a new garbage
     incinerator. Local residents and environmental groups are opposed to this
     project because of its environmental impact. Management agrees with your
     request to partner with a third party that will be responsible for providing
     state-of-the-art "air scrubbers," to clean the exhaust to an acceptable level.
     This decision will delay the project but will allow it to continue. It is an
     example of which of the following risk response?
    a.   Passive acceptance
    b.   Active acceptance
    c.   Mitigation
    d.   Transference

184. After a year and a half, it is now time for you to close your program. First,
     you are working on closing procurements. The key benefit of the Close
     Procurement process is--
    a.   It   documents agreements and related documentation for future reference
    b.   It   ensures contractual agreements are completed or terminated
    c.   It   finalizes any open claims
    d.   It   ensures there is an equitable settlement of any disputes
352    PMP(R) Exam Practice Test and Study Guide


       185. Working in the systems integration field, you are primarily responsible for
            coordinating the work of numerous subcontractors. Your current project is
            coming to an end. You have 15 major subcontractors as well as a variety
            of other sellers. Now that you are closing contracts (procurements), you
            should--
           a.   Conduct a trend analysis
           b.   Use earned value to assess lessons learned
           c.   Ask each contractor to meet with you individually at its own expense
           d.   Conduct a procurement audit

       186. You are managing a moderately risky project. You have done well identify-
            ing risks and assessing them both on the probability of the risk event occur-
            ring and on the level of impact that the risk could have on your project if it
            actually occurred. But to help with a "next" level of qualitative risk analysis,
            you could use a--
           a.   Risk priority assessment
           b.   Risk quality assessment
           c.   Risk urgency assessment
           d.   Quantitative risk analysis

       187. You are identifying possible risks to your project concerning the develop-
            ment of a nutritional supplement. You want to reach out to your experts and
            build consensus on the risks that qualitative and quantitative risk analysis
            can address later. Although you can use various techniques, a key informa-
            tion gathering technique that helps to build consensus is--
           a.   Documentation review
           b.   Probability/impact analysis
           c.   Checklist analysis
           d.   Delphi technique

       188. Managing five contractors on your project for a new stadium in your City
            that can be used for baseball and for football and can be easily converted
            for either sport is a challenge along with managing your 15 person project
            team. You decided to conduct an audit of one of your contractors and are--
           a.   Using it as a baseline for improvements to the other contracts under way
           b.   Verifying compliance in the seller's work processes
           c.   Accompanying it with a project quality audit
           d.   Using it for lessons learned documentation
                                                                          Practice Test      353


189. You are awarding another contract to serve as an integration contract on
     your stadium project. It has generated a lot of interest from potential sellers,
     and you now expect a number of proposals. You decide a weighting system
     can be used for all but which one of the following reasons?
    a. To select a single seller that will be asked to sign a standard contract
    b. To establish a negotiating sequence by ranking all proposals by the
       weighted evaluation scores that have been assigned
    c. To establish a short list of qualified sellers
    d. To establish minimum requirements of performance for one or more of
       the evaluation criteria

190. One way to make it more likely to practice project risk management on proj-
     ects is to--
    a. Hold meetings
    b. Have the team take an orientation class on risk management early in the
       project
    c. Give one team member the responsibility for risk management working
       in conjunction with the PMO
    d. Assign each team member a risk to own, which is documented in the
       risk register

191. Your firm specializes in roller-coaster construction. It recently received an
     RFP to build the world's most "death-defying" roller coaster. You know that
     such a roller coaster has never been built before and that this would be a
     high-risk project. If your firm wins, it will receive a cost-plus-award-fee con-
     tract, which means--
    a.   Your fee will be paid for completed work
    b.   Your fee amount will not change unless there is a scope change
    c.   Your fee is generally not subject to appeals
    d.   If your final cost is greater, you will share costs with the buyer based on
         a pre-negotiated cost sharing formula

192. Work performance information in Control Risks means that--
    a. Recommended preventive or corrective action is considered through
       change requests
    b. Outcomes of risk reassessments and risk audits are documented
    c. Templates to the risk management plan and the risk register are
       recommended
    d. A mechanism to communicate and support project decision making is
       provided
354    PMP(R) Exam Practice Test and Study Guide


       193. A number of factors affect make-or-buy decisions such as--
           a.   Desired level of quality
           b.   Risk-related contract decisions
           c.   Value delivered by vendors meeting the needs
           d.   Performance data

       194. For complex procurement items, often contract negotiation can be an inde-
            pendent process. An example of an input if such a process is used is--
           a.   Open items list
           b.   Approved changes
           c.   Documented decisions
           d.   Expert judgment

       195. Marketplace conditions are an input to which one of the following
            processes?
           a.   Plan Procurement Management
           b.   Conduct Procurements
           c.   Control Procurements
           d.   Close Procurements

       196. Each project can benefit from stakeholder involvement; however, it is in both
            the project manager's and the teams' best interest to ensure that all project
            stakeholdershave positive attitudes toward the project and its goals and
            objectives. Working as a project manager, you have a number of key stake-
            holders on your project. The stakeholder that identifies potential conflicts
            between organizational strategies and project goals is the--
           a.   Chairperson of the Governance Board
           b.   Program manager
           c.   Director of the project management office
           d.   Chief Operating Officer

       197. Assume you are awarding a contract for your project for a new generation
            of nuclear missiles. The contract will have an extensive approval process
            because--
           a. It is a legally binding agreement
           b. Services of experts will be needed
           c. The contract language describes what is necessary to satisfy the project's
              needs
           d. A number of stakeholders must sign off before the award is made
                                                                       Practice Test      355


198. When determining the message that you will deliver to stakeholders, know-
     ing both the content (what you want to say) and your audience is important.
     Which of the following helps you to understand how others may interpret
     your message?
    a.   Sender-receiver models
    b.   Facilitation techniques used in delivery
    c.   Negotiation skills
    d.   Presentation skills used in the development of the message

199. One of the reasons why it is challenging to work on a virtual team is that
     e-mail is the primary form of communications. However, words alone typi-
     cally comprise what percent of the total impact of any message?
    a.   Seven percent
    b.   15 percent
    c.   38 percent
    d.   55 percent

200. Assume you are working for a major airline in your country. Rather than use
     paper tickets to board, it has authorized a new product so they are available
     on mobile phones or smart watches to show to the gate agent and speed up
     boarding times. This project then is authorized because of a--
    a.   Customer request
    b.   Organizational need
    c.   Market demand
    d.   Technological advance
Answer Sheet




               357
358    Answer Sheet



        1.    a       b   c   d   21.   a   b   c   d

        2.    a       b   c   d   22.   a   b   c   d

        3.    a       b   c   d   23.   a   b   c   d

        4.    a       b   c   d   24.   a   b   c   d

        5.    a       b   c   d   25.   a   b   c   d

        6.    a       b   c   d   26.   a   b   c   d

        7.    a       b   c   d   27.   a   b   c   d

        8.    a       b   c   d   28.   a   b   c   d

        9.    a       b   c   d   29.   a   b   c   d

        10.   a       b   c   d   30.   a   b   c   d

        11.   a       b   c   d   31.   a   b   c   d

        12.   a       b   c   d   32.   a   b   c   d

        13.   a       b   c   d   33.   a   b   c   d

        14.   a       b   c   d   34.   a   b   c   d

        15.   a       b   c   d   35.   a   b   c   d

        16.   a       b   c   d   36.   a   b   c   d

        17.   a       b   c   d   37.   a   b   c   d

        18.   a       b   c   d   38.   a   b   c   d

        19.   a       b   c   d   39.   a   b   c   d

        20.   a       b   c   d   40.   a   b   c   d
                                            Answer Sheet    359



41.   a   b   c   d   61.   a   b   c   d

42.   a   b   c   d   62.   a   b   c   d

43.   a   b   c   d   63.   a   b   c   d

44.   a   b   c   d   64.   a   b   c   d

45.   a   b   c   d   65.   a   b   c   d

46.   a   b   c   d   66.   a   b   c   d

47.   a   b   c   d   67.   a   b   c   d

48.   a   b   c   d   68.   a   b   c   d

49.   a   b   c   d   69.   a   b   c   d

50.   a   b   c   d   70.   a   b   c   d

51.   a   b   c   d   71.   a   b   c   d

52.   a   b   c   d   72.   a   b   c   d

53.   a   b   c   d   73.   a   b   c   d

54.   a   b   c   d   74.   a   b   c   d

55.   a   b   c   d   75.   a   b   c   d

56.   a   b   c   d   76.   a   b   c   d

57.   a   b   c   d   77.   a   b   c   d

58.   a   b   c   d   78.   a   b   c   d

59.   a   b   c   d   79.   a   b   c   d

60.   a   b   c   d   80.   a   b   c   d
360      Answer Sheet



          81.   a       b   c   d   101.   a   b   c   d

          82.   a       b   c   d   102.   a   b   c   d

          83.   a       b   c   d   103.   a   b   c   d

          84.   a       b   c   d   104.   a   b   c   d

          85.   a       b   c   d   105.   a   b   c   d

          86.   a       b   c   d   106.   a   b   c   d

          87.   a       b   c   d   107.   a   b   c   d

          88.   a       b   c   d   108.   a   b   c   d

          89.   a       b   c   d   109.   a   b   c   d

          90.   a       b   c   d   110.   a   b   c   d

          91.   a       b   c   d   111.   a   b   c   d

          92.   a       b   c   d   112.   a   b   c   d

          93.   a       b   c   d   113.   a   b   c   d

          94.   a       b   c   d   114.   a   b   c   d

          95.   a       b   c   d   115.   a   b   c   d

          96.   a       b   c   d   116.   a   b   c   d

          97.   a       b   c   d   117.   a   b   c   d

          98.   a       b   c   d   118.   a   b   c   d

          99.   a       b   c   d   119.   a   b   c   d

         100.   a       b   c   d   120.   a   b   c   d
                                              Answer Sheet    361



121.   a   b   c   d   141.   a   b   c   d

122.   a   b   c   d   142.   a   b   c   d

123.   a   b   c   d   143.   a   b   c   d

124.   a   b   c   d   144.   a   b   c   d

125.   a   b   c   d   145.   a   b   c   d

126.   a   b   c   d   146.   a   b   c   d

127.   a   b   c   d   147.   a   b   c   d

128.   a   b   c   d   148.   a   b   c   d

129.   a   b   c   d   149.   a   b   c   d

130.   a   b   c   d   150.   a   b   c   d

131.   a   b   c   d   151.   a   b   c   d

132.   a   b   c   d   152.   a   b   c   d

133.   a   b   c   d   153.   a   b   c   d

134.   a   b   c   d   154.   a   b   c   d

135.   a   b   c   d   155.   a   b   c   d

136.   a   b   c   d   156.   a   b   c   d

137.   a   b   c   d   157.   a   b   c   d

138.   a   b   c   d   158.   a   b   c   d

139.   a   b   c   d   159.   a   b   c   d

140.   a   b   c   d   160.   a   b   c   d
362    Answer Sheet



       161.   a       b   c   d   181.   a   b   c   d

       162.   a       b   c   d   182.   a   b   c   d

       163.   a       b   c   d   183.   a   b   c   d

       164.   a       b   c   d   184.   a   b   c   d

       165.   a       b   c   d   185.   a   b   c   d

       166.   a       b   c   d   186.   a   b   c   d

       167.   a       b   c   d   187.   a   b   c   d

       168.   a       b   c   d   188.   a   b   c   d

       169.   a       b   c   d   189.   a   b   c   d

       170.   a       b   c   d   190.   a   b   c   d

       171.   a       b   c   d   191.   a   b   c   d

       172.   a       b   c   d   192.   a   b   c   d

       173.   a       b   c   d   193.   a   b   c   d

       174.   a       b   c   d   194.   a   b   c   d

       175.   a       b   c   d   195.   a   b   c   d

       176.   a       b   c   d   196.   a   b   c   d

       177.   a       b   c   d   197.   a   b   c   d

       178.   a       b   c   d   198.   a   b   c   d

       179.   a       b   c   d   199.   a   b   c   d

       180.   a       b   c   d   200.   a   b   c   d
Appendix: Study Matrix


Overview
Periodically, the Project Management Institute (PMI(R)) publishes a Role Delineation
Study (RDS) and uses to define the responsibilities of the recipients of the Project
Management Professional (PMP(R)) credential, In June 2015, PMI issued a new RDS,
for the PMP(R), which then was published as the PMI(R) PMP(R) Examination Content
Outline (ECO). You can download it from PMI's web site under the Certification
section and then by the PMP(c). It serves as the foundation for the PMP(R) exam and
for our 200-question practice test in this book and in our online test. This current
RDS is in effect for the PMP(c) exam beginning November 1, 2015.
   The ECO identified five broad performance domains and determined how
the 175 questions on the PMP(R) exam would be distributed according to these
domains*. The distribution is as follows:

                               I       Initiating                            13%
                               II      Planning                              24%
                               III     Executing                             31%
                               IV      Monitoring and Controlling            25%
                               V       Closing                                7%


The matrix beginning on page identifies each practice test question according to
its performance domain and its knowledge area in the PMBOK(R) Guide.
    The matrix is designed to help you--

      Assess your strengths and weaknesses in each of the performance domains
      Identify those areas in which you need additional study before you take the
      PMP(R) exam

*   PMI(R) distributes 25 pretest questions across the five domains in any way that it deems appropriate for the
    purpose of "testing" the questions.

                                                                                                           363
364      Appendix: Study Matrix


         Here is an easy way to use the matrix:

           Step 1 Circle all the questions you missed on the practice test in Column 1.
           Step 2 For each circled question, note the corresponding process in Column 2.
           Step 3 To determine whether any patterns emerge indicating weak areas,
             tally the information you obtained from the matrix.
           Step 4 To ensure that you have a good understanding of the major man-
             agement processes that define a particular knowledge area, including the
             inputs, tools and techniques, and outputs, refer to the appropriate knowl-
             edge area in the PMBOK(R) Guide.

         The last column in the matrix is provided for your notes.
                                                             Appendix: Study Matrix      365


Study Matrix


Practice Test
Question
Number           Performance Domain Process    Knowledge Area      Study Notes
      1         Planning                      Integration
      2         Executing                     Stakeholders
      3         Executing                     Procurement
      4         Planning                      Scope
      5         Planning                      Integration
      6         Monitoring and Controlling    Procurement
      7         Executing                     Integration
      8         Planning                      Integration
      9         Planning                      Scope
      10        Executing                     Quality
      11        Executing                     Quality
      12        Monitoring and Controlling    Procurement
      13        Monitoring and Controlling    Integration
      14        Planning                      Procurement
      15        Monitoring and Controlling    Integration
      16        Initiating                    Integration
      17        Executing                     Quality
      18        Monitoring and Controlling    Integration
      19        Monitoring and Controlling    Integration
      20        Monitoring and Controlling    Integration
      21        Planning                      Scope
      22        Executing                     Integration
      23        Monitoring and Controlling    Integration
      24        Executing                     Quality
      25        Monitoring and Controlling    Scope
      26        Closing                       Integration
      27        Executing                     Quality
      28        Planning                      Risk
      29        Planning                      Scope
366    Appendix: Study Matrix



          Practice Test
          Question
          Number           Performance Domain Process    Knowledge Area   Study Notes
                30        Executing                     Quality
                31        Monitoring and Controlling    Integration
                32        Initiating                    Integration
                33        Executing                     Human Resources
                34        Monitoring and Controlling    Time
                35        Monitoring and Controlling    Cost
                36        Monitoring and Controlling    Cost
                37        Planning                      Scope
                38        Closing                       Integration
                39        Planning                      Scope
                40        Monitoring and Controlling    Cost
                41        Executing                     Human Resources
                42        Monitoring and Controlling    Cost
                43        Monitoring and Controlling    Cost
                44        Initiating                    Integration
                45        Planning                      Integration
                46        Executing                     Integration
                47        Monitoring and Controlling    Cost
                48        Planning                      Scope
                49        Executing                     Communications
                50        Monitoring and Controlling    Cost
                51        Executing                     Human Resources
                52        Planning                      Scope
                53        Monitoring and Controlling    Time
                54        Planning                      Risk
                55        Executing                     Human Resources
                56        Monitoring and Controlling    Cost
                57        Monitoring and Controlling    Cost
                58        Initiating                    Integration
                59        Closing                       Integration
                60        Planning                      Risk
                                                             Appendix: Study Matrix      367



Practice Test
Question
Number           Performance Domain Process    Knowledge Area      Study Notes
      61        Executing                     Human Resources
      62        Planning                      Time
      63        Monitoring and Controlling    Cost
      64        Planning                      Time
      65        Executing                     Stakeholders
      66        Planning                      Time
      67        Monitoring and Controlling    Stakeholders
      68        Monitoring and Controlling    Integration
      69        Planning                      Scope
      70        Planning                      Time
      71        Planning                      Time
      72        Planning                      Time
      73        Monitoring and Controlling    Time
      74        Executing                     Integration
      75        Executing                     Human Resources
      76        Closing                       Procurement
      77        Monitoring and Controlling    Procurement
      78        Initiating                    Integration
      79        Monitoring and Controlling    Quality
      80        Executing                     Human Resources
      81        Monitoring and Controlling    Quality
      82        Executing                     Human Resources
      83        Monitoring and Controlling    Quality
      84        Monitoring and Controlling    Quality
      85        Executing                     Human Resources
      86        Monitoring and Controlling    Time
      87        Executing                     Integration
      88        Initiating                    Integration
      89        Executing                     Communications
      90        Monitoring and Controlling    Quality
      91        Monitoring and Controlling    Quality
368      Appendix: Study Matrix



          Practice Test
          Question
          Number           Performance Domain Process    Knowledge Area   Study Notes
                92        Planning                      Cost
                93        Planning                      Cost
                94        Executing                     Human Resources
                95        Closing                       Procurement
                96        Monitoring and Controlling    Quality
                97        Planning                      Time
                98        Executing                     Stakeholders
                99        Monitoring and Controlling    Stakeholders
               100        Monitoring and Controlling    Time
               101        Planning                      Time
               102        Planning                      Time
               103        Monitoring and Controlling    Time
               104        Executing                     Human Resources
               105        Initiating                    Integration
               106        Monitoring and Controlling    Risk
               107        Initiating                    Integration
               108        Closing                       Integration
               109        Planning                      Time
               110        Executing                     Human Resources
               111        Closing                       Procurement
               112        Closing                       Integration
               113        Closing                       Integration
               114        Initiating                    Integration
               115        Executing                     Human Resources
               116        Planning                      Human Resources
               117        Executing                     Human Resources
               118        Monitoring and Controlling    Human Resources
               119        Initiating                    Integration
               120        Monitoring and Controlling    Risk
               121        Initiating                    Integration
               122        Monitoring and Controlling    Risk
                                                             Appendix: Study Matrix      369



Practice Test
Question
Number           Performance Domain Process    Knowledge Area      Study Notes
     123        Monitoring and Controlling    Risk
     124        Monitoring and Controlling    Procurement
     125        Monitoring and Controlling    Procurement
     126        Planning                      Time
     127        Initiating                    Integration
     128        Executing                     Human Resources
     129        Planning                      Stakeholders
     130        Initiating                    Integration
     131        Executing                     Integration
     132        Executing                     Human Resources
     133        Planning                      Time
     134        Executing                     Human Resources
     135        Initiating                    Stakeholders
     136        Closing                       Integration
     137        Planning                      Cost
     138        Closing                       Integration
     139        Executing                     Human Resources
     140        Monitoring and Controlling    Time
     141        Monitoring and Controlling    Scope
     142        Executing                     Human Resources
     143        Executing                     Human Resources
     144        Initiating                    Stakeholders
     145        Executing                     Communications
     146        Executing                     Human Resources
     147        Initiating                    Stakeholders
     148        Executing                     Quality
     149        Planning                      Cost
     150        Initiating                    Integration
     151        Closing                       Integration
     152        Monitoring and Controlling    Scope
     153        Initiating                    Integration
370  Appendix: Study Matrix



        Practice Test
        Question
        Number           Performance Domain Process    Knowledge Area   Study Notes
             154        Initiating                    Stakeholders
             155        Initiating                    Stakeholders
             156        Executing                     Integration
             157        Planning                      Human Resources
             158        Initiating                    Integration
             159        Initiating                    Stakeholders
             160        Human Resources               Quality
             161        Planning                      Quality
             162        Planning                      Quality
             163        Executing                     Procurement
             164        Executing                     Procurement
             165        Executing                     Procurement
             166        Planning                      Procurement
             167        Planning                      Human Resources
             168        Planning                      Human Resources
             169        Planning                      Human Resources
             170        Executing                     Integration
             171        Closing                       Procurement
             172        Executing                     Communications
             173        Executing                     Integration
             174        Planning                      Human Resources
             175        Initiating                    Stakeholders
             176        Executing                     Communications
             177        Executing                     Human Resources
             178        Initiating                    Stakeholders
             179        Planning                      Risk
             180        Executing                     Quality
             181        Executing                     Procurement
             182        Executing                     Stakeholders
             183        Planning                      Risk
             184        Closing                       Procurement
                                                             Appendix: Study Matrix      371



Practice Test
Question
Number           Performance Domain Process    Knowledge Area      Study Notes
     185        Closing                       Procurement
     186        Planning                      Risk
     187        Planning                      Risk
     188        Monitoring and Controlling    Procurement
     189        Executing                     Procurement
     190        Monitoring and Controlling    Risk
     191        Planning                      Procurement
     192        Monitoring and Controlling    Risk
     193        Executing                     Procurement
     194        Executing                     Procurement
     195        Planning                      Procurement
     196        Initiating                    Stakeholders
     197        Executing                     Procurement
     198        Executing                     Communications
     199        Executing                     Communications
     200        Initiating                    Integration
Answer Key

1. c. It is not a problem at this time. The previous project manager was using
      the rolling wave planning technique, so you are able to continue defin-
      ing the activities.
      Rolling wave planning provides progressive detailing of the work to
      be accomplished throughout the life of the project. Decomposition is
      a tool and technique in Create WBS and recognizes rolling wave plan-
      ning may be needed for deliverables or subcomponents that will not
      be accomplished until much later in the project. In this case, the team
      waits until more information about the deliverable or subcomponent is
      available. [Planning]
      PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 131
      PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Planning, 6, Task 1

2. b. These concerns may become issues
      During the Manage Stakeholder Engagement process, activities include
      addressing potential stakeholder concerns that have not yet become
      issues. It involves anticipating future problems that may be raised by
      stakeholders. It is important, then, to identify and discuss these con-
      cerns as soon as possible to assess project risks. [Executing]
      PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 405
      PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Executing, 8, Task 7

3. c. Analytical techniques
      Analytical techniques are a tool and technique in Conduct Procurements.
      They are used to help organizations identify the readiness of a vendor
      to provide the desired end state, determine costs to support budgeting,
      and avoid cost overruns because of changes. By evaluating past perfor-
      mance they identify areas that have more risk and that may need to be
      monitored closely for project success. [Executing]

      PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 376
      PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Executing, 8, Task 1

                                                                           373
374    Answer Key


          4. a. Action requirements
                Such classification systems are helpful in both defining and document-
                ing stakeholder needs to meet project objectives. Project requirements
                are ones that involve actions, processes, or other conditions the project
                needs to meet. Solution requirements involve functional and nonfunc-
                tional requirements. The functional requirements describe the behav-
                iors of the product. The nonfunctional requirements supplement the
                functional ones and describe the conditions or qualities required for the
                product to be effective. The other answers are examples of nonfunc-
                tional requirements. [Planning]
                PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 112
                PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Planning, 6, Task 2

          5. b. Organizational process assets
                Organizational process assets include formal and informal plans, poli-
                cies, procedures, and guidelines. As an input to the Develop Project
                Management plan process, they include the items listed as well as
                standardized guidelines, instructions, proposal evaluation criteria, and
                performance measurement criteria; project management plan template;
                project files from previous projects; and historical information and les-
                sons learned [Planning]
                PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 75
                PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Planning, 6, Task 1

          6. a. Control Procurements
                The purpose of Control Procurements is to ensure that the contrac-
                tual requirements are met by the seller. This objective is accomplished
                by managing procurement relationships, monitoring contract perfor-
                mance and making changes and corrections to contracts if appropriate.
                [Monitoring and Controlling]
                PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 379
                PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Monitoring and
                Controlling, 9, Task 7
                                                                        Answer Key    375


 7. b. The lowest level of detail to derive information
       Work performance data are an output of the Direct and Manage Project
       Work process. They are the raw observations and measurements identi-
       fied during activities being performed to do the project work. Therefore
       they are often viewed as the lowest level of detail from which to derive
       information by other processes. The data are gathered and then passed
       to the controlling processes of each process area for further analysis.
       [Executing]
       PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 85
       PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Executing, 8, Task 2

8. b. Requirements baseline
       The scope, schedule, and cost baselines may be combined into a perfor-
       mance measurement baseline. It also may include technical and quality
       parameters. It then is used as an overall project baseline against which
       project execution is compared, and deviations are managed for project
       control. It also is used for earned value measurements. [Planning]
       PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 302, 549
       PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Planning, 6, Task 1

 9. c. Job shadowing
       Observations are a tool and technique in the Collect Requirements pro-
       cess. They provide a way to view individuals in their environment and
       to see how they perform their jobs or tasks and carry out processes. Job
       shadowing usually is done by an observer viewing the user perform-
       ing his or her job. It can also be done by a `participant observer' who
       is performing a process or procedure to experience how it is done to
       uncover hidden requirements. [Planning]
       PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 116
       PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Planning, 6, Task 2

10. b. Improvement of quality processes
       Perform Quality Assurance involves auditing the quality requirements
       and the results from quality control measurements to ensure appropri-
       ate quality standards and operational definitions are used. The key ben-
       efit of this process is it facilitates the improvement of quality processes.
       It seeks to build confidence that a future output or an unfinished out-
       put will be completed in a way that meets specified requirements and
       expectations. [Executing]
       PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 242-243
       PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Executing, 8, Task 3
376    Answer Key


         11. c. Use an affinity diagram
                 In quality assurance an affinity diagram is used to generate ideas that
                 can be linked to form organized patterns of thought about a problem.
                 Using them in project management, one can enhance the creation of
                 the WBS by using it to give structure to the decomposition of scope.
                 The affinity diagram is similar to a mind mapping technique. They are
                 part of quality management and control tools, a tool and technique in
                 Perform Quality Assurance. [Executing]
                 PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 245
                 PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Executing, 8, Task 3

         12. d. Managing the interfaces among the sellers
                 The Control Procurements process involves managing procurement
                 relationships, monitoring contract performance, and making changes
                 and corrections to contracts as needed. On a large project with multiple
                 sellers, as in this question, a major aspect is managing the interfaces
                 among the sellers. Many organizations have contract administration as
                 an administrative function separate from the project organization. While
                 a procurement administrator may be on the core team, typically this
                 person reports to someone other than the project manager in a different
                 department. [Monitoring and Controlling]
                 PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 379-380
                 PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Monitoring and
                 Controlling, 9, Task 7

         13. c. Document the specific responsibilities of each stakeholder in the
                Perform Integrated Change Control process
                 Configuration management is an integral part of the Perform Integrated
                 Change Control process. It is necessary because projects by their nature
                 involve changes. Configuration control is focused on the specification
                 of deliverables and processes. It emphasizes configuration identifica-
                 tion (answer a), configuration status accounting (answer b), and con-
                 figuration verification and audit (answer d). For further Information
                 refer to PMI's Practice Standard for Configuration Management, 2007.
                 [Monitoring and Controlling]
                 PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 96-97
                 PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Monitoring and
                 Controlling, 9, Task 2
                                                                       Answer Key  377


14. b. Procurement management plan
       The procurement management plan describes how the project manage-
       ment team will acquire goods and services from outside the performing
       organization. It describes how the procurement processes will be used
       from developing procurement documents through closing contracts.
       [Planning]
       PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 366-367
       PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Planning, 6, Task 7

15. a. Scope, quality, schedule, budget, and risk
       The constraints include, but are not limited to scope, schedule, budget
       (cost), quality, resources, and risk. Constraints are competing, and spe-
       cific project characteristics and circumstances can influence them. They
       are limiting factors that affect project execution so must be monitored
       and controlled. [Monitoring and Controlling]
       PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 6, 124
       PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Monitoring and
       Controlling, 9, Task 1

16. d. Ecological impact
       The business case is created in this question primarily as a result of
       an ecological need. Answer b refers to a customer request such as an
       electrical utility authorizing a project to build a new substation to serve
       a new industrial park. Answer c relates to a social need such as a non-
       governmental organization in a developing country to provide portable
       water systems plus other items to communities suffering from high rates
       of cholera. Other reasons are a market demand, an organizational need,
       a technological advance or a legal requirement. Sustainability does not
       apply. The business case is an input to the Develop Project Charter pro-
       cess. [Initiating]
       PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 69
       PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Initiating, 5, Task 1
378    Answer Key


        17. d. A quality audit
                A quality audit is a tool and technique in the Perform Quality Assurance
                process. It is primarily used to determine whether the project team is
                complying with organizational and project policies, processes, and pro-
                cedures. It identifies good and best practices being implemented; areas
                of nonconformity, gaps, and shortcomings; good practices introduced
                or implemented in similar projects or in the industry; ways to improve
                implementation of processes to help the team increase productivity; and
                highlights contributions of the audit in the lessons-learned repository.
                [Executing]
                PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 247
                PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Executing, 8, Task 3

        18. b. Defect repairs
                Change requests are an input to the Perform Integrated Change Control
                process. They also may include corrective action and preventive action.
                It should be noted that corrective and preventive actions tend not to
                affect the project baselines in most cases but do affect performance
                against the baselines. [Monitoring and Controlling]
                PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 97
                PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Monitoring and
                Controlling, 9, Task 2

        19. d. Identified in the project management plan
                Usually, the project manager or the project sponsor can approve or
                reject a documented change request. At times, a Change Control Board
                (CCB) is used, which later may require customer or sponsor approval.
                Regardless, the responsible person is identified in the project manage-
                ment plan or by organizational procedures. [Monitoring and Controlling]
                PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 96
                PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Monitoring and
                Controlling, 9, Task 1
                                                                          Answer Key  379


20. d. Change control meetings
        Meetings, referred to as change control meetings, are a tool and tech-
        nique in Integrated Change Control. Often, a project will set up a
        Change Control Board, which has the responsibility for meeting and
        reviewing the change requests, and approving, rejecting, or other dis-
        position of the changes. Decisions of the board are documented and
        agreed upon by appropriate stakeholders in the change management
        plan. The CCB decisions are documented to stakeholders for informa-
        tion and follow-up actions. [Monitoring and Controlling]
        PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 99
        PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Monitoring and
        Controlling, 9, Task 2

21. b. Adds business value as it links to business and project objectives
        The requirements traceability matrix is a grid that links requirements to
        their origin and traces them throughout the life cycle. It is an output in
        Collect Requirements This approach helps to ensure that each require-
        ment adds value as it links to the business and project objectives. It also
        tracks requirements during the life cycle to help ensure that the require-
        ments listed in the requirements document are delivered at the end of
        the project. It provides a structure to manage changes to product scope.
        See Figure 5-6 in the PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013 for an example. [Planning]
        PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 118-119
        PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Planning, 6, Task 3

22. b. Enterprise environmental factors
        They are an input to the Direct and Manage Project Work process.
        Other examples are organizational, cultural, and customer culture, infra-
        structure, personnel administration, and the PMIS. An example of stake-
        holder risk tolerances is allowable cost overrun percentages. [Executing]
        PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 82
        PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Executing, 8, Task 7

23. b. Configuration management system
        The formal configuration management system is an important part of
        Perform Integrated Change Control and focuses on the specifications
        for deliverables and processes. Its activities involve configuration identi-
        fication, configuration status accounting, and configuration verification.
        [Monitoring and Controlling]
        PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 96-97
        PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Monitoring and
        Controlling, 9, Task 2
380    Answer Key


        24. a. Root cause analysis
                Determining the root cause of the problem means to determine the ori-
                gin of the problem. What may appear to be the problem on the surface
                is often revealed, after further analysis, not to be the real cause of the
                problem. Process analysis includes root cause analysis used to identify
                as problem, discover the underlying causes that lead to it and develop
                preventive actions. Process analysis is a tool and technique in Perform
                Quality Assurance. [Executing]
                PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 247
                PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Executing, 8, Task 3

        25. d. Validate Scope typically precedes Control Quality
                Validate Scope focuses on accepting project deliverables, and to be
                accepted, they must meet the quality requirements. Control Quality is
                one way to ensure the correctness of the deliverables and meeting the
                quality specifications for the deliverables, which is why Control Quality
                typically is done before Validate Scope. Further, the verified deliverables
                obtained from Control Quality have been reviewed with the customer
                or sponsor to ensure they are completely satisfied and have received
                formal acceptance from the customer or sponsor. In the Validate Scope
                process, verified deliverables are a tool and technique, used to ensure
                project deliverables are completed and checked for correctness through
                Control Quality. [Monitoring and Controlling]
                PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 134
                PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Monitoring and
                Controlling, 9, Task 3

        26. c. Making sure all the activities necessary to satisfy exit criteria for a phase
               or the entire project are followed
                Administrative activities are necessary to close the project or a phase.
                To do so, the project manager needs to engage the proper stakehold-
                ers in the process. The first activity that must be done to close a project
                or a phase is the answer to the question. The second activity involves
                transferring the products, services, or results to the next phase or pro-
                ductions or operations--basically transitioning the product, services, or
                results. The final step is to collect or close project records, audit project
                success or failure, gather lessons learned, and archive information for
                future use, hopefully with a knowledge transfer system. [Closing]
                PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 101
                PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Closing, 10, Task 7
                                                                        Answer Key    381


27. c. Identifying the key issues and any suitable alternatives
        Identifying the key issues and suitable alternatives are the purpose of
        prioritization matrixes, a quality management and control tool used as
        a tool and technique in Perform Quality Assurance. In a prioritization
        matrix, these issues and alternatives to be prioritized are considered
        as a set of decisions for implementation. Then, criteria are prioritized
        and weighted before they are applied to all possible alternatives to
        obtain a mathematical score to rate the options. In this question, such
        an approach would provide a way to better focus attention on areas in
        need of improvement. [Executing]
        PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 246
        PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Executing, 8, Task 3

28. a. Identifies project assumptions
        The project scope baseline is an input to identifying risks. Project
        assumptions, which should be enumerated in the project scope state-
        ment, are areas of uncertainty, and therefore, potential causes of proj-
        ect risk. The WBS is also part of the scope baseline, and it is a critical
        source to consider in identifying risks as it facilitates an understanding
        of risks at the micro and macro levels. Risks can be identified and then
        tracked at the summary, control account, and/or work package levels.
        [Planning]
        PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 322
        PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Planning, 6, Task 10

29. c. Prototypes
        Prototypes are used to obtain early feedback on requirements by pro-
        viding a working model of the expected product before it is built.
        Stakeholders then can experiment with this model rather than discuss-
        ing abstract representations of requirements. This approach supports
        progressive elaboration, because it is used in iterative cycles of mock-
        up creation, user experimentation, feedback generation, and prototype
        revision. When enough feedback cycles have been completed, it then is
        time to move to design or build as the next phase. Prototypes are a tool
        and technique in Collect Requirements. [Planning]
        PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 116
        PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Planning, 6, Task 2
382    Answer Key


        30. a. Control Quality and Plan Quality Management
                Data from Plan Quality Management and Control Quality are used in
                Perform Quality Assurance. The Perform Quality Assurance process
                also uses affinity diagrams, process decision program charts, interre-
                lationship digraphs, tree diagrams, prioritization matrices, activity net-
                work diagrams, matrix diagrams, quality audits, and process analysis.
                [Executing]
                PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 245-247
                PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Executing, 8, Task 3

        31. d. Continuously monitor the project
                The Monitor and Control Project Work process is performed throughout
                the project and includes collecting, measuring, and disseminating per-
                formance information and assessing measurements and trends to effect
                process improvement. Continuous monitoring is important because it
                provides insight into the project's health, highlighting areas requiring
                special attention. [Monitoring and Controlling]
                PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 88
                PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Monitoring and
                Controlling, 9, Task 1

        32. d. Determine whether the project should continue to the next phase
                The review at the end of a project phase is called a phase-end review.
                It also may be called a stage gate, milestone, phase review, or kill point.
                The purpose of this review is to determine whether the project should
                continue to the next phase for detecting and correcting errors while
                they are still manageable and for ensuring that the project remains
                focused on the business need it was undertaken to address. It is impor-
                tant in the Develop Project Charter phase as the charter formally autho-
                rizes the project, providing the project manager with the authority to
                apply resources to the project. The charter then serves as an excellent
                review point before it is approved to determine if the project should
                move into planning. Clear descriptions of the project objectives may
                be developed including why a specific project is the best alternative to
                satisfy requirements. An example of a single process, showing among
                other things initiating leading to planning, is found in Figure 2-10 in the
                PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013. [Initiating]
                PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 41-42, 55, 71, 549
                PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Initiating, 5, Task 5
                                                                        Answer Key    383


33. c. Celebrating
        During the adjourning stage of team development, the emphasis is on
        tasks and relationships that promote closure and celebration. There
        is recognition and satisfaction as the team is moving on and separa-
        tion. Management skills involve evaluating, reviewing, and improving,
        while leadership qualities are celebrating and bringing closure. Project
        staff members are released as deliverables are completed or as part of
        closure; however these phases of team development (others are form-
        ing, storming, norming, and performing) are part of team-building
        techniques, a tool and technique in the Develop Project Team process.
        [Executing]
        Verma, V.K., Managing the Project Team, 1997, 40
        PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 276
        PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Executing, 8, Task 2

34. b. At +$300, the situation is favorable, as physical progress is being accom-
       plished ahead of your plan.
        Schedule variance is calculated as EV - PV, or $1,500 - $1,200 = +$300.
        Because the SV is positive, physical progress is being accomplished at
        a faster rate than planned. It is a useful metric because it can indicate
        when a project is failing behind or is ahead of its baseline schedule
        and should be used along with critical path analysis. [Monitoring and
        Controlling]
        PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 218, 224
        PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Monitoring and
        Controlling, 9, Task 1

35. d. Managing the approved cost baseline and any changes to it
        The Control Costs process involves monitoring the project's status to
        update the project costs and managing changes to the cost baseline.
        Its benefit is that is provides the means to recognize variance in order
        to take corrective action and minimize risks. Therefore, effective man-
        agement of the approved cost baseline and any changes is imperative.
        [Monitoring and Controlling]
        PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 215-216
        PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Monitoring and
        Controlling, 9, Task 1
384  Answer Key


       36. d. Recognize that your original estimates were fundamentally flawed, and
              your project is in an atypical situation
              CPI = EV/AC. It measures the cost budgeted resources. It is considered
              the most critical earned value management metric since it measures
              the cost efficiency for the completed work. The CPI is useful for deter-
              mining project status and provides a basis to estimate project cost and
              schedule outcomes. A CPI of 0.44 means that for every dollar spent, you
              are only receiving 44 cents of progress. Therefore, something is not cor-
              rect with how you planned your project, or your original estimates were
              fundamentally flawed, and your project is in an atypical situation. You
              might want to reconsider a formal "replant," taking a new baseline of
              your project, or both. [Monitoring and Controlling]
              PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 219, 224
              PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Monitoring and
              Controlling, 9, Task 1

       37. c. Project scope statement
              The project scope statement describes in detail the deliverables and
              what work must be done to prepare them. Ancillary results are also
              considered deliverables and are included in the project scope statement.
              They include items such as project management reports and documen-
              tation. Deliverables in the project scope statement may be described
              at a summary level or in a detailed way. It is the output of the Define
              Scope process. It also describes the project scope, assumptions, and
              constraints and covers the entire scope for both the project and the
              product. [Planning]
              PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 123
              PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Planning, 6, Task 2

       38. c. Expert judgment
              According to the PMBOK(R) Guide, expert judgment is used in Close
              Project or Phase to ensure closure is performed to appropriate stan-
              dards. Expertise is provided by other project managers in the organiza-
              tion, the PMO, and professional and technical associations. [Closing]
              PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 102
              PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Closing, 10, Task 1
                                                                      Answer Key    385


39. a. Project charter
       Outputs of the Define Scope process are the project scope statement
       and project document updates that include updates to the stakeholder
       register, requirements documentation, and the requirements traceability
       matrix. [Planning]
       PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 125
       PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Planning, 6, Task 2

40. a. Informing your stakeholders of approved change requests and their
       costs
       A number of activities are involved in the Control Costs process. The
       key to its effectiveness is in managing the approved cost baseline and
       any changes to it. Since change is inevitable on projects, it is a best
       practice each time there is an approved change to notify stakeholders
       of the costs to implement it, which tracks to this question as manage-
       ment is interested in a focus on controlling costs. . [Monitoring and
       Controlling]
       PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 216
       PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Monitoring and
       Controlling, 9, Task 1

41. a. Commence as scheduled and stated in the staffing management plan
       Training is a tool and technique for the Develop Project Team process.
       The requirements and schedule for training needs should be stated in
       the staffing management plan. A training plan can be developed for the
       project, and this plan can enable team members to develop or enhance
       competencies, as well as obtain certifications to benefit the project. In
       the Develop Project Team process, training is a tool and technique to
       enhance the competencies of the team members. Further, some project
       team members' skills can be developed as part of the project activities.
       Training costs can be in the project's budget or supported by the per-
       forming organization especially if the skills acquired can be used on
       future projects. [Executing]
       PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 266, 275
       PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Executing, 8, Task 2
386    Answer Key


        42. d. The range of acceptable variances will tend to decrease over time
               Variance analysis, along with trend analysis, is examples of performance
               reviews, a tool and technique in Control Costs. The most frequently
               analyzed measurements are cost and schedule variances. Cost perfor-
               mance measurements are used to assess the magnitude of variation to
               the original cost baseline. It is necessary to determine the cause and
               degree of variance relative to the baseline, but over time, the percent-
               age range of acceptable variation decreases as stakeholders see more
               work is being accomplished. They also become less likely to terminate
               the project recognizing its sunk costs and the work completed to date
               [Monitoring and Controlling]
               PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 222
               PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Monitoring and
               Controlling, 9, Task 1

        43. c. Estimate at completion
               EAC is the expected total cost to complete all work expressed as the
               sum of the actual costs to date and the estimate to complete (ETC) or
               the expected cost to finish all remaining work. It can be calculated
               several different ways. To use it effectively, the project team must deter-
               mine the ETC based on experience to date. It may differ from the bud-
               get at completion. [Monitoring and Controlling]
               PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 220, 224
               PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Monitoring and
               Controlling, 9, Task 1

        44. d. Links the project to the ongoing work of the organization
               The project charter not only authorizes a project, it shows how the proj-
               ect is linked to the strategic plan of the organization, as well as to its
               ongoing work. Among other things, the project charter documents the
               business need for the project and describes the current understanding
               of the requirements. [Initiating]
               PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 68
               PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Initiating, 5, Task 1
                                                                         Answer Key    387


45. a. Meeting management
        Facilitation techniques are a tool and technique in Develop Project
        Management Plan process. Other examples are brainstorming and prob-
        lem solving. They are used to help teams and individuals achieve agree-
        ment to accomplish the project's objectives. [Planning]
        PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 76
        PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Planning, 6, Task 1

46. d. Process measurement data base
        The process measurement data base is an organizational process asset
        that is used to collect and make available measurement data on pro-
        cesses and products. The other answers are examples of enterprise
        environmental factors used as inputs to Direct and Manage Project
        Work. [Executing]
        PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 83
        PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Executing, 8, Task 2

47. c. EAC = AC + Bottom-up ETC
        This formula assumes that all of the remaining work is independent of
        the burn rate incurred thus far. AC is $2,900 + [$500 + $1,000]. The $500
        is from Activity B, and the $1,000 is from Activity C. This bottom-up
        approach builds on the actual costs and experience incurred for the
        work completed and requires a new estimate to complete the remaining
        work. [Monitoring and Controlling]
        PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 220-221, 224
        PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Monitoring and
        Controlling, 9, Task 1

48. a. Certain deliverables or subprojects will be accomplished far into the
       future
        Many projects involve deliverables or subprojects that will be accom-
        plished far into the future and cannot be specified in detail at the cur-
        rent time. In these situations, the project management team typically
        waits until the deliverable or subproject is clarified so that details for
        that portion of the WBS can be developed. Then a rolling wave plan-
        ning approach can be used. [Planning]
        PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 131
        PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Planning, 6, Task 1
388    Answer Key


        49. c. Manage Communications process
                Lessons learned documentation is an output of the Manage
                Communications process. It is an element of the organizational process
                assets updates. It includes the causes of issues, reasons for corrective
                actions selected, and other types of lessons learned about communica-
                tions management. [Executing]
                PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 303
                PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Executing, 8, Task 6

        50. a. Influencing the factors that create change to the authorized cost
               baseline
                The Control Costs process is concerned with ensuring that requested
                changes have been acted upon, managing actual changes if and when
                they occur, ensuring cost expenditures do not exceed authorized fund-
                ing, monitoring cost performance, preventing unapproved changes from
                being included in the reported cost or resource use, informing stake-
                holders of all approved changes and their costs, and bringing expected
                cost overruns within acceptable limits. [Monitoring and Controlling]
                PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 216
                PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Monitoring and
                Controlling, 9, Task 2

        51. a. Respect and trust
                Leadership is critical to project management as it focuses on ensuring
                a group of people are working toward a common goal and enables
                them to work as a team. It involves getting things done through oth-
                ers. Respect and trust, not fear and submission, are its key elements.
                Building trust with the team and other stakeholders is a critical com-
                ponent of effective leadership. Trust is associated with cooperation,
                sharing information and effective problem resolution. Without trust it is
                difficult to establish the positive relationships necessary among stake-
                holders engaged in the project. If trust is compromised, relationships
                deteriorate, people disengage, and collaboration becomes difficult or
                impossible. The Develop Project Team process notes the importance of
                developing trust among team members and the necessity of ensuring
                the team can work independently in a climate of mutual trust, whether
                it is colocated or virtual. By improving feelings of trust among team
                members, morale and team work are increased, and there are fewer
                conflicts. [Executing]
                PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 274, 513, 517-518
                PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Executing, 8, Task 1
                                                                        Answer Key    389


52. b. 100% rule
       The WBS is a deliverable-oriented, hierarchical decomposition of work
       to be done by the project team. Sometimes called the 100% rule, it
       shows the total of the work at the lowest levels must roll up to the
       higher levels so that nothing is left out, and no extra work is done. It
       shows all product and project work including the project management
       work. [Planning]
       PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 131
       PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Planning, 6, Task 2

53. b. Use fast tracking
       Fast tracking or crashing the schedule for the remaining work to be
       done are examples of schedule compression techniques to find ways to
       bring project activities that are behind into alignment with the project
       management plan. It is a tool and technique in Control Schedule. In fast
       tracking, activities or phases normally done in sequence are done in
       parallel for part of their duration. It may result in rework and increased
       risk. It only works if activities can be overlapped to shorten the project's
       duration. [Monitoring and Controlling]
       PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 181, 190
       PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Monitoring and
       Controlling, 9, Task 1

54. c. $6.42 million
       Test: $5M + $960K + $460K = $6.42M; Don't Test: $7M. Decision tree
       analysis is a tool and technique as part of quantitative risk analysis tech-
       niques. Please refer to Figure 11-16 in the PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013 for an
       example. [Planning]
       PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 339
       PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Planning, 6, Task 10
390      Answer Key


          55. d. Promoting job satisfaction
                  Other key values are challenging work; a sense of accomplishment,
                  achievement, and growth; sufficient financial compensation; and other
                  rewards and recognition the team member considers necessary and
                  required. The Develop Project Team process in its discussion of recog-
                  nition and rewards as a tool and technique points out that people are
                  motivated if they feel they are valued in the organization. It also says
                  most people are motivated if they have an opportunity to grow, accom-
                  plish, and apply their professional skills to meet new challenges. One of
                  the key benefits of this process is motivated employees. To do so, the
                  project manager continually motivates team members by providing chal-
                  lenges and opportunities, providing timely feedback, and recognizing
                  and rewarding good performance. It is ongoing throughout the project.
                  [Executing]
                  PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 273-274. 277, 515
                  PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Executing, 8, Task 1

          56. a. Work performance information
                  The project's work performance information should document and
                  communicate the CV, SV, CPI, SPI, TCPI, and VAC for the WBS compo-
                  nents in particular for specific work packages and control accounts. It is
                  an output of Control Costs. [Monitoring and Controlling]
                  PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 225
                  PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Monitoring and
                  Controlling, 9, Task 1

          57. d. A calculated EAC value or a bottom-up EAC value is documented and
                 communicated to stakeholders
                  Cost forecasts are another output of Control Costs, and the EAC is used
                  to show the expected total costs of completing all work expressed
                  as the sum of the actual cost to date and the estimate to complete.
                  [Monitoring and Controlling]
                  PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 224-225
                  PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Monitoring and
                  Controlling, 9, Task 1
                                                                        Answer Key    391


58. d. Customer request
        Projects can be authorized as a result of a market demand, organiza-
        tional need, customer request, technological advance, legal requirement,
        ecological impact, or a social need. The new industrial park is an exam-
        ple of a project authorized because of a customer request. [Initiating]
        PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 69
        PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Initiating, 5, Task 1

59. a. An analytical technique
        Trend analysis, along with regression analysis, is an example of an
        analytical technique used in Close Project or Phase. It examines any
        changes in the cost, budget, schedule, and scope baselines during the
        project to determine why these changes were made and their impact.
        Then, these impacts can be analyzed and incorporated into the project's
        lessons learned as part of the organizational process assets updates,
        an output of this process. Throughout the project, regular use of
        trend analysis is recommended to see if performance on the project is
        improving or deteriorating. [Closing]
        PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 91-92, 103, 566
        PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Closing, 10, Task 5

60. d. List of potential responses
        The primary outputs from Identify Risks are initial entries into the risk
        register. It ultimately contains outcomes of other risk management pro-
        cesses as they are conducted. As an output of Identify Risks, the risk
        register should contain a list of identified risks and a list of potential
        responses. The potential responses identified at this time then are used
        as inputs to Plan Risk Responses. [Planning]
        PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 327
        PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Planning, 6, Task 10

61. b. Technical success
        Team performance assessments are an output of Develop Project Team.
        Team assessment criteria should be identified by relevant people in this
        process. The performance of a successful team is measured in terms of
        technical success according to agreed-upon objectives in the project,
        including quality levels; performance on the project schedule, whether
        it finished on time; and performance on budget, whether it finished
        within financial constraints. [Executing]
        PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 278-279
        PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Executing, 8, Task 2
392      Answer Key


          62. b. Monte Carlo analysis
                  Simulation is a tool and technique for the Develop Schedule process by
                  which multiple project durations with different sets of activity assump-
                  tions are calculated. Monte Carlo analysis is the most commonly used
                  simulation technique. It is also used as a tool and technique in the
                  Perform Quantitative Risk Analysis process. For schedule risk analysis, a
                  schedule network diagram and duration estimates are used. [Planning]
                  PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 180, 340, 547
                  PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Planning, 6, Task 4

          63. b. Performance measurement baseline
                  The PMB is an approved, integrated scope-schedule-cost plan for the
                  project work against which project execution is compared in order to
                  measure and manage performance. It includes contingency reserve but
                  not management reserve. It typically integrates scope, schedule, and
                  cost parameters of the project, but it may also include technical and
                  quality parameters. [Monitoring and Controlling]
                  PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 302, 549
                  PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Monitoring and
                  Controlling, 9, Task 1

          64. d. Resource breakdown structure
                  Schedule data for the project schedule includes a number of items
                  as it collects the information used to describe and control the sched-
                  ule. These data are an output of the Develop Schedule process. They
                  include schedule milestones, schedule activities, activity attributes, and
                  assumptions and constraints. They may include resource histograms,
                  alternate schedules, scheduling contingency reserves, cash flow projec-
                  tions, and order and delivery schedules. In Control Schedule, schedule
                  data are also an output as part of updates to project documents. Here
                  new project network diagrams may need to be developed to display
                  remaining deviations and approved modifications to the schedule. The
                  resource breakdown structure is used in Estimate Activity Durations. It
                  is a hierarchical structure of the identified resources by resource cat-
                  egory and type. [Planning and Monitoring and Controlling]
                  PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 168, 184, 191, and 561
                  PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Planning, 6, Task 4
                  PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Monitoring and
                  Controlling, 8, Task 1
                                                                      Answer Key    393


65. a. Root causes of issues
       In the Manage Stakeholder Engagement process, an issue log is an
       output. This log is updated as new issues are identified, and current
       issues are resolved. In updating organizational process assets, lessons-
       learned documentation notes the importance of documenting the root
       cause analysis of issues faced, reasons corrective actions were chosen,
       and other types of lessons learned about stakeholder management.
       These lessons learned are documented and distributed and are part of
       the historical data base for the project and the performing organization.
       [Executing]
       PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 408-409
       PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Executing, 8, Task 7

66. c. Work performance information
       Work performance information is an output from Control Schedule.
       Other tools and techniques that are used are resource optimization
       techniques, modeling techniques, schedule compression, and schedul-
       ing tool. [Planning]
       PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 185
       PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Planning, 6, Task 4

67. c. Update the project management plan
       If there are changes to the stakeholder management strategy, as an
       output of the Control Stakeholder Engagement process, affected sections
       of the project management plan are updated because of these changes.
       Examples are the change management, communications management,
       cost management, human resource management, procurement man-
       agement, quality management, requirements management, risk man-
       agement, schedule management, scope management, and stakeholder
       management plans. [Monitoring and Controlling]
       PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 413-414
       PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Monitoring and
       Controlling, 9, Task 1
394    Answer Key


         68. a. Configuration status accounting
                 Configuration status accounting captures, stores, and accesses the
                 needed configuration information to manage products and prod-
                 uct information effectively. It includes a list of approved configura-
                 tion identification, status of proposed changes to the configuration
                 and the implementation status of approved changes. [Monitoring and
                 Controlling]
                 PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 97
                 PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Monitoring and
                 Controlling, 9, Task 2

         69. c. Final output of creating the WBS is described in terms of verifiable
                products, services, or results.
                 By using decomposition, the upper-level WBS components are subdi-
                 vided for the work for each of the deliverables or subcomponents into
                 its most fundamental elements, where the WBS components then repre-
                 sent verifiable products, services, or results. Decomposition is a tool and
                 technique in Create WBS. [Planning]
                 PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 131
                 PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Planning, 6, Task 2

         70. a. Is optimized to show relationships between activities
                 All of the answers are ways to show project schedule network diagrams
                 and are ways to present the project schedule, an output of the Develop
                 Schedule process. A time-scaled diagram includes a time scale and bars
                 that represent the duration of activities with the logical relationships. It is
                 optimized to show the relationships between activities where any num-
                 ber of activities may appear on the same line in sequence. [Planning]
                 PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 182
                 PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Planning, 6, Task 4

         71. d. Activity name
                 Activity attributes are an output of the Define Activity process. The
                 components for each activity evolve over time. In the initial stages of
                 the project, they include the activity ID, WBS ID, and the activity name.
                 Later, when completed, they may include activity codes, description,
                 predecessor and successor activities, logical relationships, leads and
                 lags, resource requirements, imposed dates, constraints, and assump-
                 tions. [Planning]
                 PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 153
                 PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Planning, 6, Task 4
                                                                      Answer Key    395


72. b. An external dependency
       Some dependencies are external ones, and they involve a relationship
       between project activities and non-project activities. In sequencing
       activities, the project management team must determine which depen-
       dencies are external as they are usually outside of the team's control.
       Other examples of dependencies, a tool and technique in Sequence
       Activities, are mandatory, discretionary, and internal. [Planning]
       PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 157-158
       PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Planning, 6, Task 4

73. d. Trend analysis
       Trend analysis is used in many control processes in project manage-
       ment. As a tool and technique in the performance review category
       in Control Schedule, the trend analysis examines the performance of
       the project over time to determine whether performance is improving
       or deteriorating. Graphical analysis techniques are valuable in trend
       analysis to understand performance to date and to compare it to future
       performance goals in the form of completion dates. [Monitoring and
       Controlling]
       PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 188
       PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Monitoring and
       Controlling, 9, Task 1

74. c. Carrying out the work
       The implementation phase (i.e., carrying out the work) is when all inter-
       faces affecting the project must be coordinated and when the product
       or service of the project is created. In most projects, this phase is also
       where a large portion of the project budget is spent. It is where the
       project's deliverables--or any unique and verifiable product, service,
       result, or capability--required to produce the process, phase, or project
       are completed. Deliverables are an output of the Direct and Manage
       Project Work process. [Executing]
       PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 56, 84
       PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Executing, 8, Task 2
396      Answer Key


          75. b. Accommodating
                  Open subordination is much like an accommodating or smoothing style
                  of conflict management in which negotiators are more concerned about
                  positive relationships than about substantive outcomes. It can dampen
                  hostility, increase support and cooperation, and foster more interdepen-
                  dent relationships. It concedes one's position to the needs of others to
                  maintain harmony and relationships, emphasizing areas of agreement
                  rather than areas of difference. [Executing]
                  Verma, V.K., Human Resource Skills for the Project Manager, 1996, 157
                  PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 283
                  PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Executing, 8, Task 2

          76. b. Authorized procurement administrator
                  The buyer, through its authorized procurement administrator, is respon-
                  sible for providing the seller with formal written notice of contract com-
                  pletion. The procurement administrator does so when the seller has met
                  all contractual requirements as articulated in the contract. Requirements
                  for formal procurement closure are usually defined in the terms and
                  conditions of the contract, and close procurements are an output of the
                  Close Procurement process. [Closing]
                  PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 389
                  PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Closing, 10, Task 1

          77. c. Correspondence
                  Contract terms and conditions often require written documentation of
                  certain aspects of buyer/seller communications. Examples include any
                  warnings of unsatisfactory performance and requests for changes in the
                  contract or clarification. Other organizational process assets to update
                  include payment schedules and requests and seller performance evalua-
                  tion documentation. [Monitoring and Controlling]
                  PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 386
                  PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Monitoring and
                  Controlling, 9, Task 7
                                                                       Answer Key    397


78. b. Project charter
       Although the project charter cannot stop conflicts from arising, it can
       provide a framework to help resolve them, because it describes the
       project manager's authority to apply organizational resources to project
       activities. The project charter also documents the business needs, justi-
       fication, objectives, assumptions and constraints, and high-level require-
       ments that the new product, service, or result is to satisfy. [Initiating]
       PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 71-72
       PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Initiating, 5, Task 5

79. d. Checklists
       Checklists are used to verify that the work of the project and its deliver-
       ables fulfill a set of requirements. Checklists, an output of Plan Quality
       Management, are typically component specific and are used to verify
       that a set of required steps have been performed. Checklists, an input
       to the Control Quality process, are structured lists that help verify that
       the work of the project and its deliverables fulfill a set of requirements.
       [Monitoring and Controlling]
       PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 242 and 250
       PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Monitoring and
       Controlling, 9, Task 3

80. c. Zero-sum game analysis
       Achieving mutual gain during negotiations means that each party ben-
       efits by the decisions made. A zero-sum game is where one side wins
       at the expense of the other. In negotiating, the strategy is to confer
       with parties of shared or common interests with a view toward com-
       promise or reaching an agreement. Negotiation is a tool and technique
       in the Acquire Project Team process as the project management team
       may need to negotiate staff assignments with functional managers,
       other project teams in the organization, with external organizations, or
       all three. One's ability in negotiating and influencing others can assist
       greatly in acquiring exceptional personnel on the project. [Executing]
       PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 270, 517
       PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Executing, 8, Task 2
398    Answer Key


         81. d. Control charts
                 Control charts help to determine whether or not a process is stable or
                 has predictable performance. This function of control charts is achieved
                 through the graphical display of results over time to determine whether
                 differences in the results are created by random variations or are
                 unusual events. In a manufacturing environment, such charts are used
                 to track repetitive actions such as manufactured lots. In a project man-
                 agement environment, they can be used to monitor processes such as
                 cost and schedule variances, number requirements, and errors in project
                 documents. [Monitoring and Controlling]
                 PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 238
                 PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Monitoring and
                 Controlling, 9, Task 3

         82. d. Multi-criteria decision analysis
                 As a tool and technique in Acquire Project Team, this approach enables
                 criteria to be developed and used to rate or score potential team mem-
                 bers. The criteria are weighted given the team's requirements including
                 items such as availability, cost, experience, ability, knowledge, skills,
                 attitude, and international factors. [Executing]
                 Verma, V.K., Human Resource Skills for the Project Manager, 1996,
                 216-217
                 PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 271-272
                 PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Executing, 8, Task 2

         83. d. A defined integrated change control process
                 If the recommended corrective or preventive actions or a defect repair
                 require a change to any of the project management plan, a change
                 request should be prepared in conformance with the defined Perform
                 Integrated Change Control process, an output of Control Quality.
                 [Monitoring and Controlling]
                 PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 253
                 PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Monitoring and
                 Controlling, 9, Task 3
                                                                       Answer Key    399


84. a. Help anticipate how problems occur
       Flowcharts, one of the seven basic quality tools and a tool and tech-
       nique in Control Quality, depict the interrelationship of a system's
       components and show the relationships among process steps. They are
       often referred to as process maps as they display the sequence of steps
       and the branching possibilities for a process that transforms one or
       more inputs into one or more outputs. Flowcharts show activities, deci-
       sion points, branching loops, parallel paths, and the order of process-
       ing. As such, they aid the team in anticipating where quality problems
       might occur, which helps in developing approaches for dealing with
       these potential problems. [Monitoring and Controlling]
       PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 236
       PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Monitoring and
       Controlling, 9, Task 3

85. a. Escalation procedures for handling issues
       Issues occur on projects, and an escalation process to handle them is
       a best practice within the team and the performing organization. It is
       also an organizational process asset. The other answers are examples of
       enterprise environmental factors to consider. [Executing]
       PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 260
       PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Executing, 8, Task 2

86. c. Adjusting leads and lags
       Corrective action is anything that brings expected future schedule per-
       formance in line with the project plan. Adjusting leads and lags is one
       of many tools available to identify the cause of variation in the Control
       Schedule process. [Monitoring and Controlling]
       PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 190
       PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Monitoring and
       Controlling, 9, Task 1

87. d. Defect repair
       During the Direct and Manage Project Work process, work performance
       data are collected, actioned, and communicated. This process requires
       review of the impact of project changes and the implementation of pro-
       posed changes, one of which is defect repair. It is an intentional activity
       to modify a nonconforming product or project component. [Executing]
       PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 81
       PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Executing, 8, Task 1
400    Answer Key


        88. c. The person who formally authorizes the project
               The charter is issued by the project initiator or sponsor who formally
               authorizes the existence of a project and provides the project manager
               with the authority to apply organizational resources to project activities.
               [Initiating]
               PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 71
               PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Initiating, 5, Task 6

        89. a. Smoothing
               Smoothing or accommodating emphasizes areas of agreement while
               avoiding points of disagreement. It concedes one's position to the needs
               of others to maintain harmony and disagreements. It tends to keep
               peace only in the short term. [Executing]
               Adams, J.R., et al., Principles of Project Management, 1997, 181-189
               Verma, V.K., Human Resource Skills for the Project Manager, 1996, 118
               PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 283
               PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Executing, 8, Task 2

        90. c. Does not require 100% inspection of the components to achieve a satis-
               factory inference of the population
               The application of the statistical concept of probability has proven,
               over many years in many applications, that an entire population of
               products need not be inspected, if the sample selected conforms to
               a normal distribution of possible outcomes (the "bell" curve). Sample
               frequency and sizes should be determined as the quality management
               plan is prepared in order that the cost of quality includes the number of
               tests and expected scrap. It is a tool and technique in Control Quality.
               [Monitoring and Controlling]
               PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 240 and 252
               PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Monitoring and
               Controlling, 9, Task 3
                                                                       Answer Key    401


91. c. Use a control chart
       A control chart is one of the seven basic tools of quality control that
       determines whether or not a process is stable or has predictable per-
       formance. It also illustrates how a process behaves over time. When a
       process is within acceptable limits, it need not be adjusted; when it is
       outside acceptable limits, an analysis should be conducted to determine
       the reasons why. There may be penalties with exceeding the specifica-
       tion limits. It is an input to the Control Quality process. [Monitoring and
       Controlling]
       PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 238, 252
       PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Monitoring and
       Controlling, 9, Task 3

92. b. You need to reduce activity costs as much as possible
       This question shows an opportunity has been recognized, which means
       the risk register is being used as it is an input to the Estimate Costs
       process. It should be reviewed to consider risk response costs as risks,
       whether threats or opportunities, have an impact on both activity and
       overall project costs. In this example, it is a potential opportunity that
       can benefit the business either by reducing directly activity costs or
       accelerating the schedule. [Planning]
       PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 203
       PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Planning, 6, Task 3

93. a. Cost management plan
       The management and control of costs focuses on variances. Certain
       variances are acceptable, and others, usually those falling outside a par-
       ticular range, are unacceptable. The actions taken by the project man-
       ager for all variances are described in the cost management plan. These
       thresholds are typically expressed as percentage deviations from the
       baseline plan. These variances are used to monitor cost performance,
       [Planning]
       PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 199
       PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Planning, 6, Task 3
402    Answer Key


         94. c. Norming; high supportive and low directive approach
                There are four stages of team development: forming, storming, norming,
                and performing in the original team development model developed by
                Tuckman; later adjourning was added as a fifth stage. Different leader-
                ship styles in terms of the amount of required supportive and direc-
                tive behavior are appropriate when a team is in a certain development
                stage. At the norming stage, the third stage in team development, lead-
                ers provide high support and low direction. The team members begin
                to work together effectively and adjust their work habits and behavior to
                support the team. The team members trust one another. [Executing]
                Verma, V.K., Human Resource Skills for the Project Manager, 1996, 227
                PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 276
                PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Executing, 8, Task 2

         95. a. The procurement administrator is reassigned
                The Close Procurements process looks at the administration of the con-
                tract and not the people responsible or involved with the contract. The
                key benefit of this process is that it documents agreements and related
                documentation for future reference. The other answers are examples of
                administrative activities. [Closing]
                PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 386-387
                PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Closing, 10, Task 6

         96. a. Histogram
                A histogram is one of the seven basic quality tools used in the Control
                Quality process. In a histogram, or a special form of bar chart, each
                column represents an attribute or characteristic of a problem or situa-
                tion. The height of each column represents the relative frequency of the
                characteristic. It describes the central tendency, dispersion, or shape of
                a statistical distribution. Unlike a control chart, it does not consider the
                influence of time on the variation that exists within the distribution.
                [Monitoring and Controlling]
                PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 238, 252
                PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Monitoring and
                Controlling, 9, Task 3
                                                                      Answer Key    403


97. a. Estimate Costs
       The Estimate Activity Resources process involves estimating the type
       and quantities of material, people, equipment, or supplies needed to
       perform each activity, which allows more accurate cost and activity
       durations. This means close coordination with the Estimate Costs pro-
       cess is needed. [Planning]
       PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 160, 162
       PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Planning, 6, Task 4

98. d. Engaging stakeholders at certain stages
       While the other answers are good practices, this answer is part of the
       Manage Stakeholder Engagement process. It shows the necessity of
       engaging stakeholders at appropriate project stages to obtain or con-
       firm their continual commitment to the project. If a key stakeholder
       is missing meetings, it is critical for the project manager to meet with
       this stakeholder and find out his or her concerns and actively listen.
       If the stakeholder has concerns, then the project manager should
       address them and see if he or she can regain the stakeholder's support.
       [Executing]
       PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 405
       PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Executing, 8, Task 7

99. c. Use subject matter experts
       In the Control Stakeholder Engagement process, expert judgment is a
       tool and technique. They are used to ensure a comprehensive identifi-
       cation and list of new stakeholders and to reassess current stakeholders.
       Answer A is something the expert could do but the word `personally'
       notes it is something you are doing as the project manager, and it is
       one of your areas of responsibilities. Answer B is eliminated, as a stake-
       holder management plan is prepared. Answer D is to be done by the
       project manager and his or her team, as noted by the word `your' in the
       answer, and while the expert reassesses current stakeholders, it goes
       further than only the power/interest grid. [Monitoring and Controlling]
       PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 412
       PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Monitoring and
       Controlling, 9, Task 1
404    Answer Key


       100. d. The buffer needed and the buffer remaining
               Critical chain is an approach in scheduling in which the project team
               can place buffers on any project schedule path to account for limited
               resources and project uncertainties. During a performance review, com-
               paring the amount of buffer remaining to the amount of buffer needed
               to protect the delivery date can help to determine schedule status. The
               difference between the buffer needed and the buffer remaining can
               determine whether corrective action is appropriate. The critical chain
               method is part of performance reviews, a tool and technique in Control
               Schedule. [Monitoring and Controlling]
               PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 178, 189
               PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Monitoring and
               Controlling, 9, Task 1

       101. b. The resource pool can be limited to those people who are knowledge-
               able about the project
               Resource calendars are an input to the Estimate Activity Resource pro-
               cess and to the Estimate Activity Durations process. They are used
               to estimate resource use. Early in a project, the resource pool might
               include people at different levels of expertise in large numbers, but as
               the project progresses, the resource pool then can be limited to those
               people who are knowledgeable about the project because of their work
               on it. [Planning]
               PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 163, 168
               PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Planning, 6, Task 4
                                                                       Answer Key  405


102. d. Bottom-up estimating
        When an activity cannot be estimated with a reasonable degree of con-
        fidence, the work then needs to be decomposed into more detail. The
        resource needs are estimated. The estimates then are aggregated into a
        total quantity for each of the activity's resources through a bottom-up
        approach, a tool and technique in Estimate Activity Resources. These
        activities may or may not have dependencies between them. However,
        when dependencies exist, this pattern of use of resources then is docu-
        mented in the estimated requirements for each activity. Answer a, or the
        RBS, an output of this process, refers to a hierarchical representation of
        resources by category and type. Answer b, published estimating data,
        is another tool and technique in the Estimate Activity Resource process
        but is used when organizations publish updated production rates and
        unit costs for resources for different countries and geographical loca-
        tions. Answer c, also a tool and technique in this process, involves dif-
        ferent methods to accomplish schedule activities. [Planning]
        PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 164
        PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Planning, 6, Task 4

103. a. Review work performance information
        The calculated SV and SPI time performance indicators for WBS compo-
        nents, in particular the work packages and control accounts, are docu-
        mented and communicated to stakeholders as an output of the Control
        Schedule process. [Monitoring and Controlling]
        PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 190
        PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Monitoring and
        Controlling, 9, Task 1

104. d. Focus on goals to be served
        Decision making involves the ability to negotiate and influence the
        organization and the project management team. This answer is the
        first guideline; the other answers refer to items in leadership and
        influencing; all are examples of interpersonal skills of the project
        manager, a tool and technique in the Manage Project Team process.
        [Executing]
        PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 283-284
        PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Executing, 8, Task 7
406    Answer Key


       105. a. A direct way for senior management to formally accept and com-
               mit to the project
                The three benefits of the Develop Project Charter process are the
                answer and to have a well-defined project start and create a formal
                record of the project. The other answers refer to purposes of the charter
                and its importance to the project. [Initiating]
                PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 66-67
                PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Initiating, 5, Task 6

       106. b. Risk register
                The Monitor and Control Risks process includes keeping track of those
                risks on the watch list. Low-priority risks are inputs to the Monitor and
                Control Risks process and are documented in the risk register. Other
                inputs that are part of the risk register include identified risks and risk
                owners, agreed-upon risk responses, control actions to assess the effec-
                tiveness of response plans, specific implementation actions, symptoms
                and warning signs of risk, residual and secondary risks, and the time
                and cost contingency reserves. [Monitoring and Controlling]
                PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 350
                PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Monitoring and
                Controlling, 9, Task 4

       107. a. Project statement of work
                The project statement of work describes in a narrative form the prod-
                ucts, services, or results that the project will deliver. It documents the
                relationships between the products, services, and results being created,
                and the business need the project will address. It references the product
                scope description as well as the business need and strategic plan. It is
                an input to the Develop Project Scope process. [Initiating]
                PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 68
                PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Initiating, 5, Task 2

       108. b. User groups
                Meetings are a tool and technique in the Close Project or Phase process.
                They may be face to face, virtual, formal, or informal. They may include
                project team members and other stakeholders involved or affected by
                the project. Types of meetings include lessons learned, closeout, user
                group, or reviews. [Closing]
                PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 103
                PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Closing, 10, Task 7
                                                                         Answer Key    407


109. b. Parametric estimating
        Parametric estimating uses statistical relationships between historical
        data and other variables to calculate an estimate for activity param-
        eters such as cost, budget, and duration. The activity durations then
        are determined quantitatively by multiplying the quantity of work to
        be performed by the labor hours per unit of work. This technique can
        produce higher levels of accuracy depending on the reliability of the
        data in the model. Analogous estimating, or answer c, uses parameters
        from previous projects. PERT, answer d, or three-point estimating is
        used to improve the accuracy of single point activity duration estimat-
        ing. Answer a does not apply. [Planning]
        PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 169-170
        PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Planning, 6, Task 4

110. d. Performing
        The performing stage of team development is noted by a theme of pro-
        ductivity. Management skills involve consensus building, problem solv-
        ing, decision making, and rewarding, with leadership shown through
        management by walking around, stewardship delegation, mentoring,
        being a futurist, and being a cheerleader/champion. At this time, the
        team is functioning as a well-organized unit. They are independent and
        work through issues smoothly and effectively. [Executing]
        Verma, V.K., Managing the Project Team, 1997, 40
        PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 276
        PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Executing, 8, Task 2

111. b. Terms and conditions in the contract
        The terms and conditions can prescribe specific procedures for the
        various ways that a contract could be terminated. Early termination
        can result in mutual agreement between the parties, the default by the
        seller, or the convenience of the buyer if specified in the contract. The
        rights and responsibilities of the parties in the event of an early termi-
        nation are stated in the terminations clause of the contract. The pro-
        curement agreement (i.e., an understanding, contract, subcontract, or
        purchase order) includes terms of agreement, and a contract is a legal
        relationship subject to remedy in the courts. It contains termination
        clauses. [Closing]
        PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 377-378, 387
        PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Closing, 10, Task 3
408  Answer Key


      112. d. Involve stakeholders
               In the Close Process or Phase process, procedures are established and
               documented if a project is terminated before completion. To success-
               fully do so, the project manager, or the buyer as in this question, needs
               to engage all the proper stakeholders in this process. It is not time to
               reassign staff, as in answer a, as they should be involved in the admin-
               istrative activities and in a lessons-learned meeting. In answer b, the
               procurement department should not have the responsibility to complete
               all the closing activities as they are the project manager's responsibility.
               In answer c, the seller requested the termination, and the buyer agreed.
               [Closing]
               PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 101
               PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Closing, 10, Task 7

      113. b. When the project is in the closing phase
               The closing process is when all activities across all process groups are
               complete. It verifies the project then is read for closure. While a variety
               of activities are performed, one is to perform team member assessments
               and release resources. While it may be done in conjunction with the
               functional manager, answer d, it would not be the case if a projectized
               structure was used. [Closing]
               PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 58
               PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Closing, 10, Task 1

      114. c. Project charter and stakeholder register
               The project charter signifies official sanction by top management and
               starts the planning, or development, phase. This document formally rec-
               ognizes the existence of the project and provides the project manager
               with the authority to apply organizational resources to project activities.
               The stakeholder register is an output of Identify Stakeholders and also is
               the other output during the initiating processes. [Initiating]
               PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 71-72, 398
               PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Initiating, 5, Tasks 3 and 5
                                                                      Answer Key    409


115. b. Issue logs
        Issues occur on projects, and they should be documented in an issue
        log. This log is maintained and updated; each issue should be closed
        or if it no longer is an issue to the project, it should be noted on the
        log. It then is a project document to update along with requirements
        documentation, the risk register, and the stakeholder register. Project
        baselines and the process management plan are examples of items to
        update in the project management plan, another output of this process,
        and key performance indicators are examples of performance data col-
        lected as part of work performance data, another output of this process.
        [Executing]
        PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 86
        PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Executing, 8, Task 5

116. a. A kickoff meeting is recommended
        Even if team members already know one another, a kickoff meeting
        should still be held because the meeting always includes more than
        meeting team members. Specific expectations for the project can be dis-
        cussed as well as other important administrative details. Team members
        can agree upon ground rules as it also gives people an opportunity
        to express their commitment to the project's objectives. Although it is
        not mentioned per se in the PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, it was mentioned in
        earlier editions and is noted in the revised examination content outline.
        In the Plan Human Resource Management process, meetings are a tool
        and technique often used to reach consensus among the team on the
        human resource management plan. [Planning]
        Verma, V.K., Managing the Project Team, 1997, 135
        Meredith, J.R. and Mantel, Jr., S.J., Project Management: A Managerial
        Approach, 2012, 224-225
        PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 264
        PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Planning, 7, Task 12
410    Answer Key


       117. a. Consider every meeting a team meeting, not the project manager's
               meeting
                Team building should be an important a part of every project activity
                as possible. Given that there are many meetings on projects, each team
                member should be made to feel that it is his or her meeting and not
                just the project manager's meeting. This will foster greater contribution
                by each team member. Team building can be part of any meeting even
                as a five-minute agenda item as the team-building objective is to help
                individuals work together effectively as a team. It is ongoing for project
                success. [Executing]
                Verma, V.K., Managing the Project Team, 1997, 137
                PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 276
                PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Executing, 8, Task 1

       118. c. Influencing
                All are useful skills for project managers. In this situation influencing
                was necessary as the project manager has little or no direct control over
                team members as they work in a weak matrix. The ability of the project
                manager to influence stakeholders in a timely basis is critical to proj-
                ect success. Key influencing skills include being persuasive and clearly
                articulating points and positions, having active and effective listening
                skills, being aware of and considering various perspectives in any situ-
                ation, and gathering relevant and critical information to address issues
                and reach agreements while maintaining mutual trust. [Monitoring and
                Controlling]
                PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 284
                PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Monitoring and
                Controlling, 9, Task 1

       119. a. Periodically review the business case
                The key words in the question are "multi-phase project." While all of
                the answers are best practices because it is a multi-phase project, the
                business case, an input to the Develop Project Charter, may be periodi-
                cally reviewed to ensure the project is on track to deliver the business
                benefits. In the early stages of the project, a periodic review of the
                business case by the sponsoring organization helps to ensure the proj-
                ect remains in alignment with it. The project manager is responsible for
                ensuring the project meets the goals of the organization and those of a
                large set of stakeholders, as defined in the business case. [Initiating]
                PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 69
                PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Initiating, 5, Task 2
                                                                         Answer Key    411


120. a. Conduct a risk audit
         The risk audit is a tool and technique in the Control Risks process with
         two purposes: to assess the effectiveness of risk responses and to evalu-
         ate the effectiveness of the risk management process. The project man-
         ager is responsible for ensuring these audits are done at the frequency
         defined in the project risk management plan. They may be part of the
         regular project review meeting, or there may be separate meetings for
         the risk audit. [Monitoring and Controlling]
         PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 351
         PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Monitoring and
         Controlling, 9, Task 4

121. c. Not be viewed as part of the project life cycle
         Projects are efforts that occur within a finite period of time with clearly
         defined beginnings and ends. Maintenance or operations is ongoing
         and of an indefinite duration. A maintenance activity, as described in
         this question, is a separate and distinct undertaking. This question is an
         example of an operational activity in which repetitive outputs are pro-
         duced, and resources are assigned to do basically the same set of tasks
         as in a product life cycle. In this question, it ensures business opera-
         tions occur efficiently by using the optimum resources needed to meet
         customer demands. [Initiating]
         Frame, J.D., Managing Projects in Organizations: How to Make the Best
         Use of Time, Techniques, and People, 2003, 16-17
         PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 13
         PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Initiating, 5, Task 7
412    Answer Key


        122. c. Technical performance measurement
                Technical performance measurement compares technical accomplish-
                ments to date to the project plan's schedule of technical achievement. It
                requires the definition of objective, quantifiable measures of technical
                performance to help compare actual results against targets. Deviation,
                such as less functionality than planned at a key milestone, can help to
                forecast the degree of success in achieving the project scope. Risk reas-
                sessment, answer a, reviews current risks, and the amount and detail of
                repetition depends on how the project relates to its objectives. Variance
                analysis, answer b, compares planned results to actual results to see if
                there are deviations from the baseline plan. Reserve analysis, answer d,
                is used to compare the amount of contingency reserves remaining to
                the amount of possible risk remaining to see if they are adequate. All
                four answers are tools and techniques in Control Risks. [Monitoring and
                Controlling]
                PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 351-352
                PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Monitoring and
                Controlling, 9, Task 4

        123. d. Control Risks
                A workaround is a form of corrective action, as it is a response to
                a threat that has occurred for which a prior response had not been
                planned or was not effective. It is followed in most cases by a change
                request, which is prepared and submitted to the Perform Integrated
                Change Control process. These change requests are an output to the
                Control Risks process. [Monitoring and Controlling]
                PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 353, and 567
                PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Monitoring and
                Controlling, 9, Task 4

        124. b. Demands
                Claims administration is a tool and technique in the Control
                Procurements process. When the buyer and seller cannot agree, this
                is also called claims, disputes, or appeals and should be documented,
                processed, monitored, and managed throughout the contract life cycle.
                [Monitoring and Controlling]
                PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 384
                PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Monitoring and
                Controlling, 9, Task 7
                                                                        Answer Key    413


125. a. Procurement performance review
        These reviews are a tool and technique of the Control Procurements
        process, which can include a review of seller-prepared documenta-
        tion and buyer inspections, as well as quality audits conducted during
        the seller's execution of the work. They seek to identify performance
        successes or failures, progress with respect to the contract statement
        of work, and contract noncompliance. They enable the buyer to quan-
        tify the seller's demonstrated ability or inability to perform work.
        Inspections and audits, answers b and c, are specified in the contract
        and are required by the buyer to verify compliance in the seller's work
        processes or deliverables; they also are a tool and technique in this
        process. A status review meeting, answer d, is an informal session to
        discuss performance to date. [Monitoring and Controlling]
        PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 383
        PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Monitoring and
        Controlling, 9, Task 7

126. a. Add a project buffer
        After the critical path is identified using the critical chain method,
        resource availability is entered, and a resource-constrained schedule
        results. This schedule may have an altered critical path that is known as
        the critical chain. The critical chain method adds duration buffers that
        are non-work schedule activities to manage uncertainty. To protect the
        target finish date from slippage on the critical chain, a project buffer is
        placed at the end of the critical chain. [Planning]
        PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 178
        PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Planning, 6, Task 4

127. a. Codes of conduct
        Codes of conduct are an example of an enterprise environmental fac-
        tor in the area of government standards or industry relations along with
        quality standards and worker protection standards. The other answers
        are examples of organizational process assets, another input to the
        Develop Project Charter process. [Initiating]
        PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 70
        PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Initiating, 5, Task 1
414    Answer Key


       128. c. Tight matrix
                A "tight" matrix refers to team members working in close proximity to
                one another to enhance their ability to perform as a team. It is used
                in colocation, a tool and technique in Develop Project Team. It can be
                temporary or for the entire project. It is a way to post schedules and
                other items and enhances communications and a sense of community
                and is a team meeting room or a `war rom'. On a virtual team, an elec-
                tronic `war room' can be established. [Executing]
                Verma, V.K., Managing the Project Team, 1997, 169
                PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 277
                PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Executing, 7, Task 1

       129. b. Consulting with experts
                Analytical techniques, an input to Plan Stakeholder Management, can be
                used to determine the engagement level of stakeholders from unaware
                to leading. The engagement level is then documented into a stakeholder
                assessment matrix to show gaps between the current and desired engage-
                ment levels. This matrix then enables actions and communications
                required to close these gaps identified by the project team using experts.
                Expert judgment is another tool and technique in this process. [Planning]
                PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 401-402
                PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Planning, 7, Task 6

       130. d. As an input to Develop Project Charter
                Historical information is an organizational process access in the Develop
                Project Charter process. Other organizational process assets are organi-
                zational standard processes, policies, and process definitions; templates
                from other project charters; and the lessons learned data base. [Initiating]
                PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 70
                PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Initiating, 5, Task 4

       131. d. Direct and Manage Project Work
                Work performance data containing these examples are an output of
                Direct and Manage Project Work. They are raw observations and mea-
                surements identified as activities are being performed to complete the
                work of the project. These data often are viewed at the lowest level of
                detail from which information is derived by other processes. The data
                then are gathered as the work is done and passed to the controlling
                processes of the various processes for further analyses. [Executing]
                PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 85
                PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Executing, 8, Task 6
                                                                         Answer Key    415


132. d. Forcing
        Forcing, or directing, using power or dominance, implies the use of
        position power to resolve conflict. It involves imposing one viewpoint
        at the expense of another. Project managers may use it when time is of
        the essence, when an issue is vital to the project's well-being, or when
        they think they are right based on available information. It offers only
        win-lose situations. Although this approach is appropriate when quick
        decisions are required or when unpopular issues are an essential part of
        the project, it puts project managers at risk. [Executing]
        Adams, J.R., et al., Principles of Project Management, 1997, 181-189
        Verma, V.K., Human Resource Skills for the Project Manager, 1996, 157
        PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 283
        PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Executing, 8, Task 2

133. c. Managing remaining buffer durations against the remaining durations of
        task chains
        The purpose of the critical chain method is to modify the project
        schedule to account for limited resources and project uncertainty. The
        schedule is built using duration estimates with required dependencies
        and defined constraints as inputs. Then, the critical path is calculated,
        and resource availability is entered, which means there is a resource-
        limited schedule with an altered critical path. Buffers protect the critical
        chain from slippage, and the size of each buffer accounts for the uncer-
        tainty in the duration of the chain of dependent tasks that lead up to
        the buffer. This method then focuses on managing the remaining buffer
        durations against the remaining duration of task chains. See Figure 6-19
        for an example in the PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013. [Planning]
        PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 178
        PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Planning, 6, Task 4

134. c. Issue a change request
        Change requests are an output of the Manage Project Team process.
        Staffing changes can affect the rest of the team, even if by choice as
        in this situation or by an uncontrollable event. When staffing changes
        affect the project, a change request should be processed through the
        Perform Integrated Change Control process. While in this question the
        change involved moving the team member to a different assignment,
        staffing changes also involve outsourcing the work and replacing team
        members who leave. [Executing]
        PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 284
        PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Executing, 8, Task 2
416    Answer Key


        135. d. Identify all potential project stakeholders and their relevant information
                 Stakeholder analysis is a tool and technique in Identify Stakeholders to
                 gather and analyze information to determine whose interests should
                 be taken into account in the process. The first step is to identify all the
                 potential stakeholders and document their relevant information such as
                 roles, departments, interests, knowledge, expectations, and influence
                 levels. Answer c is the third step in the process. Next the model, or
                 answer b, is determined, and the stakeholder register, or answer a, is
                 the output from this process. [Initiating]
                 PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 395-396
                 PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Initiating, 5, Task 3

        136. b. Project management plan
                 Project scope is measured against the project management plan. The
                 project scope statement and scope baseline are subsets of the project
                 management plan. However, the whole plan and all the baselines (cost
                 and schedule) need to be met in addition to the scope. The project
                 management plan is the agreement between the project manager and
                 sponsor and defines what constitutes project completion. [Closing]
                 PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 102
                 PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Closing, 10, Task 1

        137. c. Determine the formula for calculating the estimate at completion (EAC)
                for the project
                 Three recognized earned value rules of performance measurement are to
                 (1) determine the EAC calculation to be used on the project as tracking
                 methodologies are specified and to provide a validity check on the bot-
                 tom-up EAC, (2) establish the earned value measurement techniques (for
                 example, weighted milestones, fixed formula or percent complete), and (3)
                 define the WBS level at which the measurements of control accounts will
                 be performed. Four methods can be used to calculate the EAC. [Planning]
                 PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 199, 224
                 PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Planning, 6, Task 3

        138. d. Final product, service, or result transition
                 All the elements are outputs of the Close Project or Phase process, but
                 the final product, service, or result transition is not part of the organiza-
                 tional process assets. It is an output on its own and involves the prod-
                 uct, service, or result that the project was created to produce. [Closing]
                 PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 103-104
                 PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Closing, 10, Task 1
                                                                         Answer Key    417


139. b. Identify the causes of the conflict
         In order to address conflict, people must recognize and acknowledge
         that conflict exists. The project manager must be able to identify the
         causes of the conflict and then actively manage it to avoid any negative
         impacts. Another best practice is to establish common ground or shared
         goals and then to separate people from the problem. Conflict should be
         addressed early and usually in private with a direct and collaborative
         approach. [Executing]
         Verma, V.K., Human Resource Skills for the Project Manager, 1996, 126
         PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 282-283; 518
         PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Executing, 8, Task 2

140. d. Determine the total float variance
         Performance reviews are a tool and technique used in Control Schedule
         and include trend analysis, critical path method, critical chain method,
         and earned value management. In terms of the critical path method, the
         emphasis is on comparing progress along the critical path to determine
         schedule status. Variance on the critical path will have a direct impact
         on the project's end date; evaluating progress of activities or near criti-
         cal paths can identify schedule risk. Calculating the total float for the
         network then enables free float also to be calculated, or the amount of
         time that a schedule activity can be delayed without delaying the early
         start date of a successor or violating a schedule constraint. After the
         variance is known, the project team can take corrective action to bring
         performance in line with the plan. [Monitoring and Controlling]
         PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 176-177, 188-189
         PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Monitoring and
         Controlling, 9, Task 1

141. a. Group decision-making techniques
         Both processes use inspection. Validate Scope also uses group-decision
         making techniques to reach a conclusion when the validation is per-
         formed by the project team and other stakeholders. Methods to reach a
         group decision include: unanimity, majority, plurality, and dictatorship.
         In Control Quality, the other tools and techniques are the seven basic
         quality tools, statistical sampling, and approved change requests review.
         [Monitoring and Controlling]
         PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 115, 135, 249
         PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Monitoring and
         Controlling, 9, Task 3
418      Answer Key


         142. c. Knowledge
                  In this situation, the key word is `customer'. In acquiring resources
                  for your team, you can use multi-criteria decision analysis, a tool and
                  technique in this process. The criteria are used to rate and score team
                  members and can be weighted to show their importance. All of the
                  answers to this question are important, but knowledge is the most
                  critical because it considers whether the team member has relevant
                  knowledge of the customer, focusing on this question. The knowl-
                  edge criterion also involves similar related projects and nuances of the
                  project environment. Other criteria not shown in the answers include
                  availability, which is not applicable because this is a top project in the
                  company, and one should then be able to acquire the resource; cost is
                  not applicable for the same reason; attitude, which is desirable for being
                  able to work well with the team; and international factors, which is not
                  applicable because the question does not note it is a global project.
                  Experience, ability, and skills are critical, but knowledge is selected
                  because it emphasizes the customer. [Executing]
                  PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 271-272
                  PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Executing, 8, Task 2

         143. d. Forcing
                  Forcing or directing is represented by a strong desire to satisfy
                  oneself rather than to satisfy others. It involves imposing one viewpoint
                  at the expense of another and is characterized by a win-lose outcome
                  in which one party overwhelms the other. It pushes one's view at
                  the expense of others, usually through a power position to resolve a
                  conflict. [Executing]
                  Adams, J.R., et al., Principles of Project Management, 1997, 181-189
                  Verma, V.K., Human Resource Skills for the Project Manager, 1996,
                  118 and 120
                  PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 282-283, 518
                  PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Executing, 8, Task 2
                                                                           Answer Key     419


144. a. Operations managers
        Operations managers are stakeholders on many projects. They deal with
        producing and managing the products and services of the organization.
        On many projects, they are responsible after the project is complete and
        has been formally handed off to them for incorporating the project into
        normal operations and providing long-term support for the product.
        During the Identify Stakeholder process, they are people who could
        impact or be impacted by a decision, activity, or outcome of the proj-
        ect, which is noted by the situation in this question. It is unclear from
        the question whether it is being done in a manufacturing environment,
        eliminating answer b; answer c also is eliminated because it is not clear
        whether outsourcing will be used; and answer d is eliminated because
        it is not stated whether there are business partners. [Initiating]
        PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 12-14, 33, 393
        PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Initiating, 5, Task 3

145. a. The choice of media
        The choice of media, or the way you deliver the information is as impor-
        tant as what you say. It is important to determine when to communicate
        in writing versus orally, when to prepare an informal memo or when to
        use a formal report, and when to communicate face to face or by email,
        as examples. Other examples involve meeting management techniques;
        presentation techniques, recognizing the importance of body language in
        communicating; facilitation techniques to build consensus and overcome
        obstacles; and listening techniques as active listening and removing barri-
        ers that adversely affect communications. [Executing]
        PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 298-299
        PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Executing, 8, Task 6

146. d. Collaborating
        Collaborating or problem solving involves bringing people with oppos-
        ing views together to reach a solution. When there are too many people
        involved, it is more difficult to reach a solution, given the multiplicity of
        perspectives. When the parties involved have mutually exclusive views,
        another conflict resolution approach is recommended. Confronting is espe-
        cially useful if there is a culturally diverse team with different perspectives
        to consider, and by enabling these different perspectives to be discussed,
        the result may be the best approach to resolve a conflict. [Executing]
        Adams, J.R., et al., Principles of Project Management, 1997, 181-189
        Verma, V.K., Human Resource Skills for the Project Manager, 1996, 119
        PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 283, 518
        PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Executing, 8, Task 2
420    Answer Key


       147.   c. Stakeholder register
                 The stakeholder register is the main output of Identify Stakeholders and
                 contains all the details known at the time related to the stakeholders
                 including identification information, assessment information, and stake-
                 holder classification. The project manager and team should review the
                 stakeholder register regularly since stakeholder identification is ongoing
                 throughout the project, and different stakeholders may have different
                 interests, expectations, or potential influence than those initially identi-
                 fied. [Initiating]
                 PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 398
                 PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Initiating, 5, Task 3

       148. c. Change requests
                 Quality improvements to processes and procedures as well as the proj-
                 ect and product will result in a change request that will be reviewed
                 and evaluated to allow full consideration of the recommended improve-
                 ments using the Perform Integrated Change Control process. The
                 key words in this question are "that feeds directly into the Perform
                 Integrated Change Control processes". These change requests are used
                 take corrective or preventive actions or to perform defect repair. The
                 quality management plan and updates to project documents are other
                 outputs of this process. [Executing]
                 PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 247-248
                 PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Executing, 8, Task 3

       149. d. Basis of estimates
                 Basis of estimates is an output from the Estimate Costs process. Other
                 tools and techniques are expert judgment, analogous estimating, para-
                 metric estimating, bottom-up estimating, project management software,
                 and group decision-making techniques. [Planning]
                 PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 204-208
                 PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Planning, 6, Task 3
                                                                        Answer Key    421


150. a. Develop Project Charter
        In the Develop Project Charter process, an agreement is an input to
        define initial intentions for the project. They may be known as an
        understanding, a contract, a subcontract, or a purchase order. In the
        Develop Project Charter process they may be a service level agreement,
        letter of agreement, letters of intent, verbal agreement, e-mail, or other
        written agreements. [Initiating]
        PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 70, 377
        PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Initiating, 5, Task 5

151. c. Accepted deliverables
        Accepted deliverables are an input to the Close Project or Phase. They
        may include approved product specifications, delivery receipts, and work
        performance documents. Partial or interim deliverables may be included
        if it is a phased or canceled project. Other inputs are the project man-
        agement plan and organizational process assets. The other selections are
        inputs or tools and techniques for other processes. [Closing]
        PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 102
        PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Closing, 10, Task 1

152. d. Use variance analysis
        Variance analysis is the tool and technique in Control Scope. It focuses
        on determining the cause and degree of difference between the base-
        line and actual project performance. The magnitude of the variation
        from the original scope baseline is assessed through project perfor-
        mance measurements. By using variance analysis, a decision can be
        made as to whether corrective or preventive action is needed. Answers
        a and b are variants of inputs to scope control, and answer c is part of
        work performance information, which is an output from this process.
        [Monitoring and Controlling]
        PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 139
        PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Monitoring and
        Controlling, 9, Task 1

153. c. A high-level requirement
        The project charter formally authorizes the existence of the project and
        provides the project manager with the organizational resources for the
        project activities. Using agile is an example of a high-level requirement,
        which is one of the many items included in the charter. [Initiating]
        PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 71-72
        PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Initiating, 5, Task 5
422    Answer Key


       154. c. Note key stakeholders as parties in the contract
                Procurement documents are an input to the Identify Stakeholder pro-
                cess. If the project results from a procurement activity or is based on
                an established contract, the parties in the contract are key project stake-
                holders. Others, such as suppliers, are also stakeholders and should be
                added to the stakeholder list. [Initiating]
                PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 394
                PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Initiating, 5, Task 3

       155. a. Manage them closely
                You must manage them closely. High-power/high-interest stakehold-
                ers who do not support your project could have a devastating effect on
                your project. Refer to Figure 13-4 in the PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013 for an
                example. [Initiating]
                PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 396-397
                PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Initiating, 5, Task 3

       156. b. Maintenance requests
                Defect repairs, corrective actions, preventive actions, and updates are
                types of change requests that occur on a project. Updates involve
                changes to formally controlled documents and plans to reflect modified
                or additional ideas to cover. Maintenance requests typically would be
                outside the scope of the project itself. Change requests can be direct,
                indirect, and externally or internally initiated, as well as optional and
                legally or contractually mandated. [Executing]
                PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 85
                PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Executing, 8, Task 4

       157. a. Role
                The human resource plan documents roles and responsibilities on the
                project. A role is the function assumed by or assigned to a person in
                the project. The court liaison in this question is an example of such a
                role on a project. Role clarity concerning authority, responsibilities, and
                boundaries also should be documented to help avoid negative conflicts
                later in the project. [Planning]
                PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 264
                PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Planning, 6, Task 5
                                                                        Answer Key    423


158. a. Determine who decides the project is a success
        Project approval criteria should be documented in the project char-
        ter. These criteria include determining what constitutes success, who
        decides the project is successful, and who signs of on the project.
        [Initiating]
        PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 72
        PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Initiating, 5, Task 6

159. a. Focus on relationships necessary to ensure success
        The project manager has limited time on a project, and his or her time
        should be used as efficiently and effectively as possible. Therefore, by
        performing a stakeholder analysis, the project manager can identify the
        stakeholder relationships that can be leveraged to build coalitions and
        potential partnerships to enhance project success and to determine rela-
        tionships that need to be influenced differently at different stages of the
        project or phase [Initiating]
        PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 395
        PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Initiating, 5, Task 8

160. c. Have an unambiguous owner for each work package
        Regardless of the method used to document each team member's roles
        and responsibilities, the objective is to ensure that each work package
        has an unambiguous owner and that all team members have a clear
        understanding of their roles and responsibilities. For example, an orga-
        nizational chart or hierarchical format may be used to show high-level
        roles. The text format provides more detailed information to document
        responsibilities. The first two answers refer to the resource breakdown
        structure, and the last answer refers to the organizational breakdown
        structure. [Planning]
        PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 261-262
        PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Planning, 6, Task 5
424    Answer Key


       161. c. Process analysis
                Process analysis is used as a tool and technique in Perform Quality
                Assurance. The tools and techniques used during Plan Quality
                Management are: the seven basic quality tools (cause-and-effect dia-
                grams, flowcharts, checksheets, Pareto diagrams, histograms, control
                charts, and scatter diagrams), cost of quality, benchmarking, design
                of experiments, statistical sampling, additional quality planning tools
                (brainstorming, force field analysis, nominal group technique, and qual-
                ity management and control tools, [affinity diagrams, process decision
                program charts, interrelationship diagraphs, tree diagrams, prioritization
                matrices, activity network diagrams, and matrix diagrams]), and meet-
                ings. [Planning]
                PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 235-241 and 245-246
                PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Planning, 6, Task 8

       162. c. Quality policy
                The quality policy includes the overall intentions and the direction of
                the organization regarding quality and as formally expressed by top
                management. When the performing organization lacks a formal qual-
                ity policy or when the project involves multiple performing organiza-
                tions, as in a joint venture, the project management team must develop
                a quality policy for the project as an input to its quality planning under
                organizational process assets. The quality management plan then
                describes how the quality policy will be implemented. [Planning]
                PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 234, 241
                PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Planning, 6, Task 8

       163. b. You may need to compensate the seller for seller preparations and for
               any completed or accepted work
                Early termination of a contract is a special case of procurement closure.
                The rights and responsibilities of the parties are contained in a termi-
                nation clause of the contract. Typically such a clause allows the buyer
                to terminate the whole contract or a portion of it for cause or conve-
                nience at any time. In doing so, the buyer may need to compensate the
                seller for seller's preparations and for any completed and accepted work
                related to the terminated part of the contract. [Executing]
                PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 378, 387
                PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Executing, 8, Task 1
                                                                       Answer Key    425


164. d. It includes a specific contract management plan.
        A contract management plan is not part of an agreement. A procure-
        ment management plan is used to describe how the project team will
        acquire goods and services from outside the organization. An agree-
        ment may be called an understanding, a contract, a subcontract, or a
        purchase order. Regardless of the document's complexity, the contract is
        a mutually binding legal agreement that obligates the seller to provide
        the specified products, services, or result, and it obligates the buyer to
        compensate the seller. It is a legal relationship subject to remedy in the
        courts. [Executing]
        PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 357, 377-378
        PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Executing, 8, Task 1

165. d. Project review meetings
        Bidders conferences are meetings with prospective sellers prior to the
        preparation of a bid or proposal to answer questions and clarify issues.
        They are a tool and technique in the Conduct Procurements process.
        They are used to ensure the prospective sellers have a clear and com-
        mon understanding of the procurement requirements, and that no
        bidders receive preferential treatment. Project review meetings are con-
        ducted to assess project performance and status. [Executing]
        PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 375
        PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Executing, 8, Task 1

166. a. Have a meeting
        Meetings are tool and technique in Plan Procurement Management.
        They are held as research alone may not provide specific information
        for a procurement strategy without additional information exchange
        with potential bidders. Through collaborating with potential bidders the
        organization purchasing the material or service may benefit. Suppliers
        may benefit to influence a mutually beneficial approach or product.
        Other tools and techniques are make-or-buy analysis, expert judgment,
        and market research, [Planning]
        PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 366
        PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Planning, 6, Task 7
426    Answer Key


       167. c. Project expeditor
                A variation of the weak matrix organizational structure, the proj-
                ect expeditor has no formal authority to make or enforce decisions.
                Nonetheless, the project expeditor must be able to persuade those in
                authority to maintain the project's visibility so that resources will be
                allocated as needed to meet the project's schedule, budget, and quality
                constraints. This approach is considered to be effective in high-technol-
                ogy and research and development environments. However, the expe-
                ditor tends to be a staff assistant. He or she cannot personally make
                decisions or enforce them. In the Plan Human Resource Management
                process, it is the focus of the organization chart for the project and the
                role of the project manager. [Planning]
                Verma, V.K, The Human Aspects of Project Management, 1995, 153-154
                PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 23, 258
                PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Planning, 6, Task 5

       168. c. Can use a flexible leadership style
                In the Plan Human Resource Management process, organizational
                theory is a tool and technique. It notes that different organizational
                structures have different individual responses, individual performance,
                and relationship characteristics. It also states that organizational theories
                may recommend a flexible leadership style that adapts to the changes
                in a team's maturity level, as in this question, throughout the project life
                cycle. [Planning]
                PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 263
                PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Planning, 6, Task 5

       169. b. Use experts
                Although all four answers are tools and techniques in the Plan Human
                Resource Management process, experts are the most appropriate
                answer. Expert judgment is a key tool and technique. It especially
                applies to this question as it notes expert judgment is used to determine
                the reporting relationships based on the organization culture. [Planning]
                PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 263
                PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Planning, 6, Task 5
                                                                           Answer Key    427


170. a. Preventive action
         The Direct and Manage Project Work process, among other thing, also
         requires review of the impact of all project changes and the implemen-
         tation of approved changes. This means preventive action, the answer
         to this question, which is proactive and intentional. [Executing]
         PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 81
         PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Executing, 8, Task 4

171. b. Auditing project success or failure and archiving records
         The key words in this question are "activities for administrative closure".
         Administrative closure includes step-by-step methodologies that address:
         actions and activities necessary to satisfy completion or exit criteria for
         the phase or the project; actions or activities to transfer the products,
         services, or results to the next phase or to production or operations;
         and activities to collect project or phase records, auditing success or fail-
         ure, gathering lessons learned, and archiving information for future use
         in the organization. Although these administrative closure activities do
         address transition of the product, answer d, the acceptance of deliver-
         ables is not part of these administrative activities. The same is the case
         with answer c. While lessons learned are included in these administra-
         tive activities, final contractor payments are not done as part of these
         activities. [Closing]
         PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 101
         PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Closing, 10, Task 3

172. a. An effective and efficient flow of communications among stakeholders
         While the Manage Communications process covers numerous areas,
         its benefit is to enable this efficient and effective communication flow
         among stakeholders. To do so, appropriate communications technology
         is required for the information that is being communicated. Appropriate
         communications models are needed for many purposes including avoid-
         ing and managing any communications barriers and choosing commu-
         nications methods most appropriate to the project and its stakeholders.
         These methods ensure that the information that has been created and
         distributed is received and understood for effective responses. Different
         methods are available to manage and distribute information, and perfor-
         mance reports are prepared periodically and analyzed to assess project
         progress, as well as performance and forecast project results. [Executing]
         PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 297, 299-301
         PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Executing, 8, Task 6
428    Answer Key


       173. a. Adaptive life cycle
                The adaptive life cycle is one that is known as change driven or one
                with agile methods and is set up to respond to high levels of change
                and ongoing stakeholder involvement. This approach differs from itera-
                tive and incremental, even though they are characteristic of the adap-
                tive life cycle, as durations are very rapid, such as a two to four week
                period, and are fixed in time and cost. This approach is preferred in a
                rapidly changing environment where requirements and scope are dif-
                ficult to define in advance and when it is possible to define small incre-
                mental improvements, which deliver value to stakeholders. [Executing]
                PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 46
                PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Executing, 8, Task 6

       174. c. Prepare a staff release plan
                The staff release plan determines the method and timing of releasing
                team members. Morale is improved if there are smooth transitions for
                the staff to upcoming projects, which are already planned. This staff
                release plan also helps to mitigate human resource risks that may be
                occurring or arise at the end of a project. Further, the costs of these
                resources are no longer charged to the project, reducing overall project
                costs. It is part of the staffing management plan, which is part of the
                human resource plan. [Planning]
                PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 266
                PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Planning, 6, Task 5

       175. d. Analyze each stakeholder's impact or support and classify them
                The second step in the stakeholder analysis process is to analyze the
                potential impact or support each stakeholder could generate and then to
                classify the stakeholders to define an approach or strategy. It is impor-
                tant to prioritize the stakeholders to ensure the efficient use of effort to
                communicate with them and best manage their expectations. Answer
                b is step one in the analysis process, and answer d is the third and
                last step. In studying for the PMP, if there are steps in a key area, learn
                them in case there is a question about when something should be done.
                [Initiating]
                PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 396
                PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Initiating, 5, Task 3
                                                                        Answer Key    429


176. b. Select communications technology
        Although all four listed are tools and techniques in the Manage
        Communications process (another is communications methods), this
        project is a virtual one and the choice of technology is an important
        consideration. It can vary from project to project and throughout the
        life cycle, but as the project manager the focus is to ensure the choice
        is important for the information that is communicated. It is the first tool
        and technique listed. The other tool and technique not listed is to deter-
        mine the communication models. [Executing]
        PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 300-301
        PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Executing, 8, Task 6

177. d. Storming
        During the storming stage, the team is addressing the work, techni-
        cal decisions, and the project management approach. However, if team
        members are not collaborating and open to different ideas and perspec-
        tives, the environment becomes counter-productive. It is the second
        stage in the Tuckman team development model (i.e., forming, storming,
        norming, performing, and adjourning). [Executing]
        PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 276
        PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Executing, 8, Task 1

178. b. A power/influence grid
        Although a number of classification models are available to help priori-
        tize the key stakeholders, the power/influence grid groups stakeholders
        based on their level of authority or power and their active involvement
        or interest in the project. See Figure 13-4 in the PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013
        for an example. A study tip is to know these four models and to know
        which one is the best one to use under which circumstances, in case
        there is a related question on them on your exam, [Initiating]
        PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 396
        PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Initiating, 5, Task 3
430      Answer Key


         179. b. Checklists
                  Checklists are a tool and technique of the Identify Risks process and
                  are developed based on historical information and knowledge, as well
                  as lessons learned from previous projects. The lowest level of the risk
                  breakdown structure can be used. Although checklists are quick and
                  simple to use, it is impossible to build a checklist that completely and
                  exhaustively covers all risks because each project is a unique under-
                  taking. The team also needs to explore other items not on the check-
                  list, and it should be pruned at times to archive or remove items that
                  may no longer apply to the organization's projects. It also should be
                  reviewed during project closure to incorporate new lessons learned and
                  improve it for future projects. The other answers in this question refer
                  to other tools and techniques for Identify Risks. [Planning]
                  PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 325
                  PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Planning, 6, Task 10

         180. b. An emphasis on the International Organization for Standardization
                  The basic approach to project quality management in the PMBOK(R)
                  Guide is intended to be compatible with the International Organization
                  for Standardization's (ISO) quality standards. Projects require a quality
                  management plan and need data for quality assurance to demonstrate
                  compliance with the plan. In achieving ISO compatibility, modern
                  quality management seeks to minimize variations and to deliver results
                  that meet defined requirements. These approaches recognize the impor-
                  tance of customer satisfaction, prevention over inspection, continu-
                  ous improvement, management responsibility, and the cost of quality.
                  [Executing]
                  PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 227-229
                  PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Executing, 8, Task 3
                                                                             Answer Key     431


181. b. All potential sellers are given equal standing
         The bidders conference, contractor conference, vendor conference, or
         pre-bid conference is a tool and technique in Conduct Procurements.
         They are meetings between the buyer and prospective sellers prior to
         submitting a bid or a proposal. Bidders conferences are conducted to
         ensure all prospective sellers have a clear and common understanding
         of the requirements. They are not used to prequalify vendors. Thus, all
         vendors are treated equally. All prospective sellers should hear every
         question and every answer from the buyer. Fairness is addressed by
         techniques including collecting questions from bidders or arranging field
         visits in advance of the conference. Responses to questions can be incor-
         porated into the procurement documents as amendments. [Executing]
         PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 375
         PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Executing, 8, Task 1

182. b. Building trust
         Building trust helps to build the foundation of the relationship and is a criti-
         cal component in effective team leadership. It is associated with coopera-
         tion, information sharing, and effective problem resolution. Without trust, it
         is difficult to establish positive relationships with the various stakeholders
         engaged in the project. If trust is compromised, people will disengage, and
         collaboration becomes more difficult if not impossible. [Executing]
         PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 407, 517
         PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Executing, 8, Task 7

183. d. Transference
         Risk transference is shifting some or all negative impact of a threat and
         the ownership of the response to the threat to a third party. It does not
         eliminate the threat posed by an adverse risk. It simply gives another
         party responsibility for it. It almost always involves paying a risk pre-
         mium to the party taking on the risk. It is most useful in dealing with
         financial risk exposure. Transference tools are diverse and include using
         insurance, performance bonds, warranties, and guarantees. Contracts
         or agreements also can be used to transfer liability for specified risks
         in case the buyer has capabilities the seller does not possess. It may be
         prudent to transfer some work and its concurrent risk back to the buyer.
         A cost-plus contract can be used to transfer the cost risk to the buyer,
         while a fixed-price contract is preferred to transfer risk to the seller. It is
         one of four strategies to use in response to negative risks or threats; the
         other three are avoidance, mitigation, and acceptance. [Planning]
         PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 344
         PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Planning, 6, Task 10
432    Answer Key


       184. a. It documents agreements and related documentation for future
               reference
                A number of administrative activities are part of this process, but its key
                benefit is stated in the answer. The outputs then are closed procure-
                ments and updates to organizational process assets focusing on the pro-
                curement file, acceptance of deliverables, and documentation of lessons
                learned. [Closing]
                PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 386, 389
                PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Closing, 10, Task 5

       185. d. Conduct a procurement audit
                The procurement audit attempts to identify successes and failures rela-
                tive to the procurement process especially in terms of the preparation
                or administration of other procurement contracts on the project or on
                other projects in the organization. Uncovering and reporting both suc-
                cesses and failures can contribute to the project management knowl-
                edge base and improve the quality of project management services. It is
                a structured review of the procurement process from Plan Procurement
                Management through Control Procurements. A procurement audit
                should be conducted as part of the Close Procurements process. It is a
                tool and technique in this process. [Closing]
                PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 388
                PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Closing, 10, Task 5

       186. c. Risk urgency assessment
                Risks that may occur in the near-term need urgent attention. The pur-
                pose of the risk urgency assessment is to identify those risks that have
                a high likelihood of occurring. Indicators of priority may include the
                probability of detecting a risk, time to affect a risk response, symptoms
                and warning signs, and the risk rating. Assessing risk urgency can be
                combined with the risk ranking that is determined from the probability
                and impact matrix for a final risk severity rating. It is a tool and tech-
                nique in Perform Qualitative Risk Analysis. [Planning]
                PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 333
                PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Planning, 6, Task 10
                                                                           Answer Key     433


187. d. Delphi technique
         When consensus is necessary, the Delphi technique is a frequently used
         information gathering technique as a tool and technique in Identify
         Risks. A facilitator first sends out a questionnaire to the experts to solicit
         ideas. The responses then are summarized and returned to the experts
         for further comment. Consensus generally is reached after a few such
         rounds. The Delphi technique helps to reduce bias in the data and the
         undue influence of one person on the outcome. Other information
         gathering techniques are brainstorming, interviewing, and root-cause
         analysis. [Planning]
         PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 324
         PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Planning, 6, Task 10

188. b. Verifying compliance in the seller's work processes
         Inspections and audits are tools and techniques in the Control
         Procurements process. They are required by the buyer and supported
         by the seller as specified in the procurement contracts and can be
         conducted as the project is executed to verify compliance in the sell-
         er's work processes or deliverables. If it is part of the contract, some
         inspection and audit teams can include buyer procurement personnel.
         [Monitoring and Controlling]
         PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 383
         PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Monitoring and
         Controlling, 9, Task 7

189. d. To establish minimum requirements of performance for one or more of
        the evaluation criteria
         Weighting systems are developed and used to help select the best seller
         as part of the proposal evaluation techniques. By assigning a numerical
         weight to each evaluation criterion, the buyer can emphasize one area
         as being more important than another. These proposal evaluation tech-
         niques are a tool and technique in the Conduct Procurements process
         for the other answers to this question. [Executing]
         PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 373, 375
         PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Executing, 8, Task 1
434      Answer Key


         190. a. Hold meetings
                  Meetings are a tool and technique in the Control Risks process. Risk
                  management should be an agenda item at periodic status meetings.
                  While the amount of time needed for risk management will vary
                  depending on the identified risks, their priority, and the difficulty of
                  the response, the more often risk management is practiced, the easier it
                  becomes. Frequent discussions about risk make it more likely that risks
                  and opportunities will be identified. [Monitoring and Controlling]
                  PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 352
                  PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Monitoring and
                  Controlling, 9, Task 4

         191. c. Your fee is generally not subject to appeals
                  This contract type reimburses the seller for all legitimate costs, but the
                  majority of the fee is earned only based on the satisfaction of broad
                  subjective performance criteria defined and incorporated in the con-
                  tract. The fee determination is based on subjective determination of
                  seller performance by the buyer; it generally is not subject to appeals.
                  [Planning]
                  PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 364
                  PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Planning, 6, Task 7

         192. d. A mechanism to communicate and support project decision making is
                 provided
                  All of the answers are outputs in the Control Risks process, however,
                  work performance information specifically provides a mechanism to
                  communicate and support project decision making. [Monitoring and
                  Controlling]
                  PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 353-354
                  PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Monitoring and
                  Controlling, 9, Task 4
                                                                       Answer Key    435


193. c. Value delivered by vendors meeting the needs
        Other factors to consider include the core capabilities of the organi-
        zation, the risks associated with meeting the need in a cost-effective
        way, and capability internally compared with the vendor community.
        Organizations procuring goods and services analyze the need, iden-
        tify resources, and then compare procurement strategies if they decide
        to buy. They evaluate factors that influence the make-or-buy deci-
        sions including the answer to this question and the other factors listed
        in the rationale. The make-or-buy decisions are an input to Control
        Procurements. [Executing]
        PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 374
        PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Executing, 8, Task 1

194. a. Open items list
        Issues or an open item list are examples of inputs if contract negotiation
        is an independent process. Outputs are documented decisions. While
        contract negotiations may need to be a separate process for complex
        procurements, for simple procurement items, the terms and conditions
        of the contract can be fixed and nonnegotiable. Procurement negotia-
        tions are a tool and technique in Control Procurements. [Executing]
        PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 377
        PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Executing, 8, Task 1

195. a. Plan Procurement Management
        Enterprise environmental factors, which include marketplace conditions
        that the team needs to be aware of as it develops its plans for purchases
        and acquisition, are an input to the Plan Procurement Management pro-
        cess. [Planning]
        PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 362
        PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Planning, 6, Task 7
436    Answer Key


        196. b. Program manager
                Organizational strategy provides guidance and direction to project man-
                agement. Portfolio managers, sponsors, or program managers identify
                alignment or potential conflicts between organizational strategies and
                project goals and communicates them to the project manager. If the
                goals of the project conflict with established organizational strategy, the
                project manager should document and identify these conflicts as early
                as possible. At times, the development of an organizational strategy
                could be the goal of a project rather than a guiding principle. If this is
                the case, then the project must specify what constitutes an appropriate
                organizational strategy to sustain the organization. [Initiating]
                PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 15
                PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Initiating, 5, Task 8

        197. c. The contract language describes what is necessary to satisfy the
                project's needs
                All project documents are subject to some type of review and approval.
                However, a contract is legally binding agreement, as well as some other
                types of agreements, subject to remedy in the courts, and it is therefore
                subjected to a more extensive approval process. In all cases, however,
                the primary focus of this review and approval process is to ensure the
                contract language describes the products, services, or results that satisfy
                the identified needs of the project. [Executing]
                PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 357
                PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Executing, 8, Task 1

        198. a. Sender-receiver models
                Sender-receiver models incorporate feedback loops to provide opportu-
                nities for interaction/participation and remove barriers to communica-
                tion. They are useful in the Manage Communications process as it goes
                beyond distributing information and seeks to ensure that the informa-
                tion that is being generated for stakeholders has also been received and
                understood. It also provides opportunities for stakeholders to request
                further information. [Executing]
                PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 298
                PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Executing, 8, Task 6
                                                                       Answer Key    437


199. a. Seven percent
        Albert Meharabian, a researcher, discovered that words alone account
        for just seven percent of any message's impact. Vocal tones account for
        38 percent of the impact, and facial expressions account for 55 percent
        of the message. Thus, project managers should use nonverbal ingredi-
        ents to complement verbal message ingredients whenever possible and
        should recognize that nonverbal factors generally have more influence
        on the total impact of a message than verbal factors. Body language is
        mentioned in the Manage Communications process in terms of presen-
        tation techniques, along with visual aids. This lack of nonverbal cues
        makes project communications in a virtual environment more challeng-
        ing. [Executing]
        Verma, V.K., Human Resource Skills for the Project Manager, 1996, 19
        PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 299
        PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Executing, 8, Task 6

200. d. Technological advance
        The business case is an input to the Develop Project Charter process.
        All four answers are reasons for the business case, but this question
        shows the new product is needed because of technological advances
        in mobile phones and smart watches. Other reasons to create a busi-
        ness case are a legal requirement, ecological impacts, or a social need.
        [Initiating]
        PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 69
        PMI(R) PMP Examination Content Outline, 2015, Initiating, 5, Task 5
References

Acker, David D. Skill in Communication: A Vital Element in Effective Management. 2nd
     ed. Ft. Belvoir, Va.: Defense Systems Management College, 1992.
Adams, John R., and Bryan W. Campbell. Roles and Responsibilities of the Project
     Manager. Upper Darby, PA: Project Management Institute, 1982.
Adams John R., et al. Principles of Project Management. Newton Square, PA: Project
     Management Institute, 1997.
The Associated General Contractors of America. Construction Planning and Scheduling.
     Washington, D.C.: The Associated General Contractors of America, 1994.
Bell, Chip R. Managing as Mentors: Building Partnerships for Learning. San Francisco:
     Berrett-Koehler, 1996.
Bicheno, John. The Quality 50. Melbourne, Australia: Nestadt Consulting Party, 1994.
Bockrath, Joseph T. Contracts, Specifications, and Law for Engineers. 4th ed. New York:
     McGraw-Hill, 1986.
Brake, Terence, Danielle Medina Walker, and Thomas (Tim) Walker. Doing Business
     Internationally: The Guide to Cross-Cultural Success. 2nd ed. Boston: McGraw-Hill,
     2002.
Cable, Dwayne, and John R. Adams. Organizing for Project Management. Upper Darby,
     PA: Project Management Institute, 1982.
Carter, Bruce, Tony Hancock, Jean-Marc Morin, and Ned Robins. Introducing RISKMAN
     Methodology: The European Project Risk Management Methodology. Oxford,
     England: NCC Blackwell, 1994.
Cavendish, Penny, and Martin D. Martin. Negotiating and Contracting for Project
     Management. Upper Darby, PA: Project Management Institute, 1987.
Cibinic, John, Jr., and Ralph C. Nash, Jr. Cost-Reimbursement Contracting. 2nd ed.
     Washington, D.C.: The George Washington University, National Law Center,
     Government Contracts Program, 1993.
Cleland, David I., and Lewis R. Ireland. Project Management: Strategic Design and
     Implementation. 5th ed. New York: McGraw-Hill, 2007.
Cohen, Dennis J., and Robert J. Graham. The Project Manager's MBA: How to Translate
     Project Decisions into Business Success. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass, 2001.
Corbin, Arthur L. Corbin on Contracts. St. Paul, MN: West Publishing, 1952.
Covey, Stephen R. The Seven Habits of Highly Effective People: Powerful Lessons in
     Personal Change. New York: Free Press, 20013.
Crosby, Philip B. Quality Is Free: The Art of Making Quality Certain. New York: McGraw-
     Hill, 1979.
____. Quality Without Tears: The Art of Hassle-Free Management. New York: McGraw-
     Hill, 1984; reprint, New York: Penguin Books, 1985.



                                                                                   439
440    References


       Defense Systems Management College. Risk Management: Concepts and Guidance. Ft.
             Belvoir, VA: Defense Systems Management College, 1989.
       DeMarco, Tom, and Timothy Lister. Peopleware: Productive Projects and Teams. New
             York: Dorset House Publishing, 1987.
       Dinsmore, Paul C. Human Factors in Project Management. Rev. ed. New York: American
             Management Association, 1990.
       Dinsmore, Paul C., and Manuel M. Benitez. "Challenges in Managing International
             Projects." AMA Handbook of Project Management, edited by Paul C. Dinsmore.
             New York: AMACOM Books, 1993, 463-464.
       Dinsmore, Paul C., M. Dean Martin, and Gary T. Huettel. The Project Manager's Work
             Environment: Coping with Time and Stress. Upper Darby, PA: Project Management
             Institute, 1985.
       Dobler, Donald W., and David N. Burt. Purchasing and Supply Management: Text and
             Cases. 6th ed. New York: McGraw-Hill, 1996.
       Dreger, J. Brian. Project Management: Effective Scheduling. New York: Van Nostrand
             Reinhold, 1992.
       Evans, James R., and William M. Lindsay. The Management and Control of Quality. 6th
             ed. Mason, OH: South-Western, 2005.
       Ferraro, Gary P. The Cultural Dimension of International Business. 3rd ed. Upper Saddle
             River, NJ: Prentice Hall, 1998.
       Filley, Alan C. Interpersonal Conflict Resolution. Glenview, IL: Scott, Foresman, and Co.,
             1975.
       Fisher, Roger, William Ury, and Bruce Patton. Getting to Yes: Negotiating Agreement
             Without Giving In. 2nd ed. New York: Penguin Books, 1991.
       Fleming, Quentin W. Cost/Schedule Control Systems Criteria: The Management Guide to
             C/SCSC. Chicago: Probus Publishing, 1988.
       ____. Project Procurement Management Contracting, Subcontracting, Teaming. Tustin,
             CA: FMC Press, 2003.
       Fleming, Quentin W., and Joel M. Koppelman. Earned Value Project Management. 4th
             ed. Newtown Square, PA: Project Management Institute, 2012.
       Forsberg, Kevin, Hal Mooz, and Howard Cotterman. Visualizing Project Management.
             New York: John Wiley and Sons, 1996.
       Frame, J. Davidson. Managing Projects in Organizations: How to Make the Best Use of
             Time, Techniques, and People. 3rd ed. San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass, 2003.
       ____. The New Project Management: Tools for an Age of Rapid Change, Corporate
             Reengineering, and Other Business Realities. 2nd ed. San Francisco, CA: Jossey-
             Bass, 2002.
       Friedman, Jack P. Dictionary of Business Terms. 2nd ed. Hauppauge, NY: Barron's
             Educational Series, Inc., 1994.
       Hirsch, William J. The Contracts Management Deskbook. Rev. ed. New York: American
             Management Association, 1986.
       Imai, Masaaki. Kaizen: The Key to Japan's Competitive Success. New York: McGraw-Hill,
             1986.
       International Standards Organization. Guidance on Project Management. Geneva,
             Switzerland. ISO., 2012, ISO 21500:2012.
       ____. Quality Management Systems--Fundamentals and Vocabulary. Geneva,
             Switzerland. ISO., 2008, ISO 9000:2008.
       ____. Standardization and Related Activities--General Vocabulary. Geneva,
             Switzerland. ISO., 2004, ISO/IEC 2:2004.
       ____. Systems and Software Engineering--System Life Cycle Processes. Geneva,
             Switzerland. ISO/IEC., 2008, 15288:2008.
                                                                              References       441


Ireland, Lewis R. Quality Management for Projects and Programs. Drexel Hill, PA:
      Project Management Institute, 1991.
Jentz, Gaylord A., Kenneth W. Clarkson, and Roger LeRoy Miller. West's Business Law.
      2nd ed. St. Paul, MN: West Publishing, 1984.
Katzenbach, Jon R., and Douglas K. Smith. The Wisdom of Teams. New York:
      HarperBusiness, 1994.
Kerzner, Harold. Project Management: A Systems Approach to Planning, Scheduling, and
      Controlling. 11th ed. Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons, Inc., 2013.
Kirchof, Nicki S., and John R. Adams. Conflict Management for Project Managers. Upper
      Darby, PA: Project Management Institute, 1989.
Kostner, Jaclyn. Knights of the Tele-Round Table: Third Millennium Leadership. New
      York: Warner Books, 1994.
Levin, Ginger, and Steven Flannes. Essential People Skills for Project Managers. Vienna,
      VA: Management Concepts Inc., 2005.
Levin, Ginger. Interpersonal Skills for Portfolio, Program, and Project Managers. Vienna,
      VA: Management Concepts Inc., 2010.
Lewis, James P. Project Planning, Scheduling, and Control. Chicago: Probus Publishing,
      1991.
Mansir, Brian E., and Nicholas R. Schacht. An Introduction to the Continuous
      Improvement Process: Principles and Practices. Bethesda, MD.: Logistics
      Management Institute, 1988.
Martin, Martin D., C. Claude Teagarden, and Charles F. Lambreth. Contract
      Administration for the Project Manager. Upper Darby, PA: Project Management
      Institute, 1990.
Maslow, Abraham H. Motivation and Personality. New York: Harper and Row, 1954.
McGregor, Douglas. The Human Side of Enterprise. New York: McGraw-Hill, 1960.
Meredith, Jack R., and Samuel J. Mantel, Jr. Project Management: A Managerial
      Approach. 8th ed. Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley and Sons, 2012.
Pennypacker, James S., ed. Principles of Project Management: Collected Handbooks from
      the Project Management Institute. Sylva, NC: Project Management Institute, 1997.
PMI(R) (see Project Management Institute).
Pritchard, Carl L., Risk Management: Concepts and Guidance. 5th ed. Boca Raton, FL:
      CRC Press, 2015.
Project Management Institute. PMI(R) Code of Ethics and Professional Conduct. www.pmi.
      org
____. PMI(R) Lexicon of Project Management Terms. www.pmi.org/lexiconterms. 2012
____. A Guide to the Project Management Body of Knowledge, (PMBOK(R) Guide). 5th ed.
      Newtown Square, PA: Project Management Institute, 2013.
____. Organizational Project Management Maturity Model (OPM3(R)). 3rd ed. Newtown
      Square, PA: Project Management Institute, 2013.
____.PMP Examination Content Outline, June 2015. www.pmi.org
____. Practice Standard for Earned Value Management, 2nd ed. Newtown Square, PA:
      Project Management Institute, 2011.
____. Practice Standard for Project Estimating. Newtown Square, PA: Project
      Management Institute, 2011.
____. Practice Standard for Scheduling. 2nd ed. Newtown Square, PA: Project
      Management Institute, 2011.
____. Practice Standard for Work Breakdown Structures, 2nd ed. Newtown Square, PA:
      Project Management Institute, 2006.
____. Project Management Professional (PMP) (R) Credential Handbook, 2015. http://
      www.pmi.org/
442    References


       ____. The Standard for Portfolio Management--3rd Edition. Newtown Square, PA:
            Project Management Institute, 2013.
       ____. The Standard for Program Management--3rd Edition. Newtown Square, PA:
            Project Management Institute, 2013.
       Rose, Kenneth H. Project Quality Management: Why, What and How. Second Edition.
            Boca Raton, FL: J. Ross Publishing, 2014.
       Rosen, Robert, Patricia Digh, Marshall Singer, and Carl Phillips. Global Literacies: Lesson
            on Business Leadership and National Cultures. New York: Simon & Schuster, 2000.
       Schmauch, Charles H. ISO 9000 for Software Developers. Milwaukee: ASQC Quality
            Press, 1994.
       Soin, Sarv Singh. Total Quality Control Essentials: Key Elements, Methodologies, and
            Managing for Success. New York: McGraw-Hill, 1992.
       Stewart, Bennett G. Best Practice-EVA: The Definitive Guide to Measuring and
            Maximizing Stakeholder Value. Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons, 2013.
       Stuckenbruck, Linn C., ed. The Implementation of Project Management: The
            Professional's Handbook. Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley, 1981.
       Stuckenbruck, Linn C., and David Marshall. Team Building for Project Managers. Upper
            Darby, PA: Project Management Institute, 1985.
       Thamhain, Hans J., and David L. Wilemon. "Conflict Management in Project Life Cycles."
            Sloan Management Review 16, no. 3 (Spring 1975): 31-50.
       Verma, Vijay K. Human Resource Skills for the Project Manager. Vol. 2 of The Human
            Aspects of Project Management. Upper Darby, PA: Project Management Institute,
            1996.
       ____. Managing the Project Team. Vol. 3 of The Human Aspects of Project Management.
            Upper Darby, PA: Project Management Institute, 1997.
       ____. Organizing Projects for Success. Vol. 1 of The Human Aspects of Project
            Management. Upper Darby, PA: Project Management Institute, 1995.
       Verzuh, Eric. The Fast Forward MBA in Project Management. Hoboken, NJ: John
            Wiley & Sons, 2005.
       Vroom, Victor H. Work and Motivation. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass, 1995.
       Wideman, R. Max, ed. Project and Program Risk Management: A Guide to Managing
            Project Risks and Opportunities. Preliminary ed. Drexel Hill, PA: Project
            Management Institute, 1992.
       Willborn, Walter, and T. C. Edwin Cheng. Global Management of Quality Assurance
            Systems. New York: McGraw-Hill, 1994.
       Youker, Robert. "Communication Styles Instrument: A Team Building Tool." In The
            Project Management Institute 1996 Proceedings: Revolutions, Evolutions, Project
            Solutions, 27th Annual Seminars and Symposium, Papers Presented October 7-9,
            1996, Boston, Mass., 796-799. Upper Darby, PA: Project Management Institute, 1996.
                          Business Management / Project Management

                          Continuing in the tradition of its bestselling predecessors, PMP(R)
                          Exam Practice Test and Study Guide, Tenth Edition uses self
                          study to help readers increase their chances of passing the PMP(R)
                          certification exam the first time around. This tenth edition is up to
                          date with the 2015 Examination Content Outline (ECO) published
                          by the Project Management Institute (PMI(R)), which is the blueprint
                          for the exam.

                          In addition to 600 practice test questions, this edition includes a
                          new chapter on the five process domains. It supplies an overview
                          of each knowledge area, a list of exam topics, and 40 multiple-
                          choice questions for each of the ten knowledge areas presented
                          in A Guide to the Project Management Body of Knowledge Fifth
                          Edition (PMBOK(R) Guide).

                          As in previous editions, this edition provides a clearly written
                          rationale for each correct answer, along with a supporting reference
                          list. To help broaden your understanding of the concepts in the
                          answer, this edition features an expanded rationale that discusses
                          why a particular answer is correct, some study tips to consider,
                          and in many cases, an explanation as to why the other answers are
                          incorrect.

                          For each answer, the authors supply references to the appropriate
                          pages in the PMBOK(R) Guide and the specific ECO domain and
                          task. You will also find references to one or more of the five
                          process groups: Initiating, Planning, Executing, Monitoring and
                          Controlling, or Closing at the end of each rationale.

                          The book features a 200-question online practice test that simulates
                          the actual PMP(R) exam. It also includes the authors' proprietary
                          proficiency rating that will help you assess your strengths and
                          weaknesses in each process domain so you can identify the areas
                          where you require further study.


                                                                 K27321
                      6000 Broken Sound Parkway, NW
                      Suite 300, Boca Raton, FL 33487    ISBN: 978-1-4987-5282-4
                      711 Third Avenue                                      90000
                      New York, NY 10017
an informa business   2 Park Square, Milton Park
www.crcpress.com      Abingdon, Oxon OX14 4RN, UK
                                                        9 781498 752824

                                                        www.auerbach-publications.com
